# *Racism: A Short History* by George M. Fredrickson

## Chapter One: Religion and the Invention of Racism

Fredrickson argues that we find the seeds of modern racism in a religious
context in late medieval Europe.  Christianity always had a difficult
relationship with Jews who did not convert, but things grew worse in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries.  Some Christians demonized Jews; they
claimed that Jews killed Christian children for their rituals or abused
consecrated hosts.  Christians also began to strongly associate Jews with the
devil, to consider them subhuman.  Some people also blamed the Black Death
(1346 to 1353) on Jews, who supposedly poisoned wells to create the plague.
In addition, as explorers became familiar with people further and further from
Europe, some Europeans assumed or developed attitudes of superiority to the
indigenous peoples that they encountered.  These negative attitudes towards
Jews and non-Europeans sometimes took on what Fredrickson considers
a distinctive and essential component: the notion that the differences were
hereditary and unchangeable.

However, Fredrickson also argues that Christianity prevented a truly
systematic, universalizing form of racism.  Officially, the Catholic church
and other religious groups still maintained the universal message of the
gospel.  According to this vision, all humans were essentially the same (made
by god, in his image, etc.), and all people could be and should be converted.
Whoever converted deserved all the rights of any other Christian.  Of course,
this ideal vision was not always honored.  At times we see clear ideas of
“purity of blood” as necessary for full rights.  In addition, some people
denied that Jews or some non-Europeans could truly convert to Christianity.
Nevertheless, Fredrickson maintains that medieval Christianity prevented the
full flowering of racism as he understands it.  That would come later, though
as he acknowledges, we see its beginnings in medieval Europe.


## Chapter Two: The Rise of Modern Racism(s)

Fredrickson begins where he ended.  In the late medieval and early modern
periods, some people believed “that differences between Christians and Jews or
between Europeans and Africans were ineradicable” (51).  Thus, those people
“embrac[ed] a racist doctrine” (52).  However, church and secular authorities
mostly resisted these doctrines.  Instead, they maintained a universalism that
made it difficult for racism to fully flower.  If all humans were the
descendants of Adam and Eve, who were created by god in his image, then
salvation was available to all humans.  Some people in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries suggested polygenesis, but “biblical literalism” held
back such theories (52).  Fredrickson reminds us that racist ideology was held
back by religion and that secularization would unleash a full, ideological
racism.

According to Fredrickson “[t]he modern concept of races as basic human types
classified by physical characteristics (primarily skin color) was not invented
until the eighteenth century” (52-53).  However, he also notes that the word
*race* had some uses that helped lead to the modern concept.  He points out
the use of the word *race* in contexts of animal breeds as well as noble
families.  In both contexts, we see ideas of sub-types within a species that
can be ranked and whose continuity was tracked through blood and breeding.
These notions reappear in the racist context of *race*.  The word *race* also
implied “stable and presumably unchangeable characteristics” (53).  This too
is essential for racism.

Fredrickson notes that during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
we see the beginnings of modern racism, but it takes time for it to fully
develop.  In North America, only black people were enslaved, but not all black
people were enslaved.  In fact, some black people were free precisely because
they were Christian.  Similarly, the lives of Jewish people improved somewhat
during this period.  However, the improvements were very unevenly distributed.
A small number of Jews became enormously wealthy, but the vast majority of
Jews remained desperately poor and separate from the rest of society.

Depressingly, the rise of sciences like biology and anthropology during the
Enlightenment helped modern racism develop.  Scientists and scholars eagerly
tried to divide the human race into distinct types.  Carl Linnaeus, for
example, came up with a familiar-sounding group: Europeans, Native Americans,
Asians, and Africans.  He also characterized these groups in familiar ways:
Europeans were “acute” and “governed by laws,” but Africans were “indolent”
and “governed by caprice” (56).

As Fredrickson argues, these scholars and scientists helped to create secular
racism.  They considered human beings to be one of many animals rather than
unique and divinely-made descendants of a loving god.  These same Enlightened
scholars rushed in to explain the differences between the races they perceived
in pseudo-scientific ways.  Some argued that the climate caused races to
differ.  Others argued that the larger environment was the cause.  For
example, Buffon argued that Europeans were smarter than Africans because they
had to be.  Since Europeans had to struggle to provide food for themselves by
farming, they became more intelligent.  Since Africa naturally provided so
much, Africans became larger, heavier, and less intelligent.  (Note to self:
this sounds so much like modern evolutionary anthropology to me.)  Fredrickson
notes that theories of environmental change leave open the possibility of
improvement.  But there are two problems.  First, no one had any idea how long
that might take.  Second, people remained convinced that as things stand,
non-Europeans are superior.

Fredrickson makes and aside to discuss the “purely aesthetic aspect of
eighteenth-century racial attitudes” since he believes that scholars have not
discussed these enough (59).  He cites “Greek and Roman statuary” and the
“milky whiteness of marble” as a cause of the common belief that Europeans and
lighter skin were more beautiful than other peoples and (especially) darker
skin.  However, I wonder whether he has cause and effect backwards.  I suspect
that there was enough information in the eighteenth century that art
historians and classical scholars should have known better.  That is, they
should have known that these statues were not originally white.  Thus, if they
insisted on whiteness as a mark of beauty, they were already in the grip of
a socially constructed view of beauty.  The statues did not necessarily cause
racist aesthetic theories; racist aesthetic theories may have led to a false
view of the statues themselves.

Fredrickson helpfully discusses the relationship between popular racism and
intellectual or theoretical racism.  On the one hand, he notes that popular
racism can develop without much, or any, support from intellectual or
theoretical racism (61).  On the other hand, he points out that intellectual
or theoretical racism may develop but still have little, or no, effect on
popular attitudes.  He uses Voltaire as an example.  Voltaire was utterly
racist against both Jews and black people, but this was not a significant
legacy of his work (61-63).

Voltaire reminds me of another important point: reason cannot save us.  I like
to imagine reason leading people away from irrationality towards objectivity,
truth, and understanding.  However, as Fredrickson notes, “No thinker better
illustrates the dual character of Enlightenment rationalism—its simultaneous
challenge to hierarchies based on faith, superstition, and prejudice and the
temptation it presented to create new ones allegedly based on reason, science,
and history” (63).

In sum, according to Fredrickson, the Enlightenment pulled in two directions.
On the one hand, Enlightenment thinkers denied a form of universalism backed
by the bible and religion, and they set the stage for nineteenth-century
scientific racism.  On the other hand, these same thinkers argued strenuously
for an earthly equality for all, or at least an equality for more of the
people than in previous periods.  Obviously, “equality for all” was capable of
existing with slavery, enormous gaps in wealth, and the denial of rights for
women, and non-citizens.  Nevertheless, the Enlightenment created the
conditions that led more and more groups to fight for their piece of the pie.

Fredrickson distinguishes the development of racism under different types of
eighteenth-century nationalism.  In countries like the United States and
France, we see civic nationalism: (notionally) universal equality for all
under law without basis in ethnicity, language, or race.  This means that you
cannot rely on old world distinctions in class as in, e.g., Great Britain.
Instead, polygenesis was popular in such countries because it provided
justification for distinguishing between different races.  On such a basis,
people could argue that universal equality only applied to people of some
races.  In places like Germany, we find ethic nationalism.  The nation is
based on shared language, culture, and ethnicity.  In this context, racism
does need to rely on polygenesis.  Instead, racism relies directly on
differences in language, culture, and ethnicity.

Fredrickson seems to assume that racism will happen no matter what, though he
does not discuss this explicitly.  Earlier in the book, for example,
Fredrickson quotes two scholars who describe racism as a “scavenger ideology”
(8, citing John Solomos and Les Back).  Later in the book, Fredrickson quotes
two other scholars who argue that “racism must, in their words become a ‘a
political project’ that ‘*creates or reproduces structures of domination based
on essentialist categories of race*’” (75, citing Michael Omi and Howard
Winant, emphasis in Fredrickson).  In several contexts, he seems to assume
that there is always racist energy, so to speak, and the only question is how
a given historical time and place realizes that energy.  Alternatively, there
is no such thing as racist energy, but there is always (often? generally?)
a desire to dominate? On this view, racism is simply a convenient and popular
tool, but the real goal is domination.  One or both theories may be fine, but
I’d like to think about them more.

Fredrickson devotes the last twenty pages of this chapter to a comparison
between the history of antisemitism in Germany and anti-black racism in the
United States.  There’s a great deal of interest here, but I want to quote one
major conclusion at length.

> [T]he American conception of citizenship had to include blacks once their
> full humanity was acknowledged.  But the logical outcome of the blood-based
> folk nationalism increasingly embraced by the Germans was the total
> exclusion or elimination of Jews.  The implications of this difference would
> become apparent only in the mid-twentieth century.  If we take 1900 as our
> vantage point, there is no question that the American color line was much
> more rigid than the barriers between Jews and gentiles in Germany.  Perhaps
> future developments in Germany were not inevitable.  Without further crises,
> frustrations, and ideological developments, Jewish assimilation into a more
> tolerant and pluralist Germany might well have occurred.  Similarly,
> Americans might not have repudiated their legalized racial caste system and
> embraced public equality in the 1960s if it had not been for some domestic
> and international political contingencies.  Historical preconditions do not
> usually become determinants unless there are some intervening circumstances
> or contingencies (93-94).

## Chapter 3: Climax and Retreat: Racism in the Twentieth Century

In this chapter, Fredrickson traces the histories of what he calls *overtly
racist regimes* (100).  As in the previous chapter, he considers anti-black
racism (in the US and South Africa) in parallel with antisemitism in Germany.
Like many people, he sees the the recent past as a time when racism against
black people and Jews reached a high point and then retreated.  (Or at least
retreated in some senses, as he will discuss in the epilogue.)

What makes an overtly racist regime distinct?  According to Fredrickson, we
see the following features.  First, there must be an official and explicit
racist ideology.  Second, there are laws against interracial marriage in order
to preserve (alleged) racial purity.  Third, the law demands social
segregation; segregation is not merely a matter of habit or individual
choices, however racist those may be themselves.  Fourth, in an otherwise
democratic system, the racial groups who are discriminated against cannot hold
office (either *de facto* or *de jure*?).  Fifth, the majority of members of
the groups discriminated against are barred from state resources and economic
opportunity; thus, they are poor by design.  According to Fredrickson, the
American South under Jim Crow, South Africa under apartheid, and Nazi Germany
all meet these criteria.  (I think nearly everyone would agree.)

Fredrickson argues that there is a difference between states with significant
racism and overtly racist states.  He briefly discusses racism in various
European colonies and former colonies and racism in Latin America. Although
there was abundant racism in all of these places, he nevertheless concludes
that they all fell short of being overtly racist regimes.

In addition, Fredrickson argues that we should study Nazi Germany, the
American South, and South Africa together because the rest of the world
changed in response to them together.  That is, countries all over the world
viewed these three regimes with horror, banded together to act against them,
and passed international laws in response to their behavior.  As Fredrickson
says, “[the] rise and fall [of these regimes] were major events, not only in
the history of these countries themselves, but also in the history of the
world” (104).

Fredrickson also believes that modernization made it possible (and indeed
necessary) for overtly racist regimes to arise.  As the world changed from
rural and preindustrial to urban and industrial, new arrangements were
necessary and possible in order to maintain racist norms and relationships.
At the same time, modern capitalism pushed towards treating everyone as equal
cogs in an indiscriminate machine.  Thus, explicit laws and arrangements were
needed in order “to maintain and ethnic status order based on religion and
ancestry” (104).

Fredrickson asks explicitly why these three regimes developed where they did
and why other places did not become explicitly racist regimes.  He notes that
other places had a greater percentage of Jews or non-whites than the American
South, South Africa, or Germany.  Why didn’t those places become explicitly
racist?  He gives one unsatisfying answer: these three places had stronger
prejudice than other places.  Unfortunately, that simply pushes the question
back: *why* did they have stronger prejudice?  He also mentions that all three
of the places where explicit racism developed identified their hated Others
with some form of “national defeat and humiliation” (106).  In the American
South, racists associated black people with the loss in the Civil War and with
Reconstruction.  The Nazis associated Jews with Germany’s loss and humiliation
in World War I.  And white Afrikaners blamed black Africans for their role in
the South African War (1899-1902).  Black people and Jews were scapegoats for
others who were out of reach because they were too powerful for the defeated
parties to punish.  (I.e., “the American North, the Allies in World War I, and
Great Britain” (106).)

Fredrickson considers the Holocaust a singular turning point in how people
viewed explicit racism.  He quotes Jürgen Habermas: “the rug was pulled out
from under *all* claims to legitimacy that did not at least rhetorically
embrace the universalistic spirit of the political Enlightenment” (128,
emphasis in original).  (Question for myself: how will Fredrickson square this
with the development of apartheid in 1948?)  The backlash against racism also
led to a backlash against eugenics, according to Fredrickson.  In the same
way, people in the United States and in the rest of the world viewed the Jim
Crow American South with a new revulsion.

Fredrickson cites two other causes for a mid-century turn away from open
racism: decolonization and the Cold War.  The people from former colonies
certainly had every incentive to oppose white supremacy, and Americans who
wanted to win over these same people in the battle against Communism worried
about the impression that anti-black racism in the south made on the rest of
the world.  The Soviet Union used racism in the United States to great effect
in their propaganda, and the Unites States had additional, selfish reasons to
improve the conditions for black people in America.

At the same time, Fredrickson cites research by Philip Klinkner and Rogers
Smith that highlights how conditional American anti-racists efforts are.
Klinkner and Smith argue that anti-racist progress requires “times when
national success or survival seems to depend on inclusiveness and the
affirmation of egalitarian values” (131).  Fredrickson worries that “World War
II and the Cold War thus provided a window of opportunity for blacks that is
now closing” (131).  (Note to myself: this reminds me a great deal of Derek
Bell’s theory that changes in the law rely on a convergence of interests.
See, e.g., Bell’s “Brown v. Board of Education and the Interest-Convergence
Dilemma” Harvard Law Review 93 (3): 518-533.)

In order to explain the exception of South Africa, an openly racist state that
became even more racist in 1948, Fredrickson points to the Cold War in
a different way.  South Africa was resolutely anti-communist, and as Africa
decolonized, more and more countries became communist or sympathetic to
communism and the Soviet Union.  Thus, even though, e.g., Truman supported the
civil rights movement in the US, he also supported South Africa because of the
Cold War.  The Cold War helped to increase progress in the US, and the end of
the Cold War is a threat to further progress in the US.  In South Africa, it
was the other way around.  The Cold War helped the white settler governments
to keep down 70% of the population of the country, and the end of the Cold War
sped up the end of apartheid.

## Epilogue: Racism at the Dawn of the Twenty-First Century

The epilogue sketches out two thoughts.  First, Fredrickson acknowledges that
even though over racist regimes are largely gone, quite a lot of racism
remains.  Second, he argues that much of the worst kinds of discrimination and
inequality now arise from religious rather than racist motivations.
Fredrickson partially unites these two thoughts when he invokes culture rather
than race as a currently dominant tool of oppression.  Fredrickson insists
that since the middle of the twentieth century, the world has moved steadily
away from open scientific, biological, essentialist racism.  However, he
grants that there is still quite a lot of racism that relies on treating
culture in an essentialist manner.  At the same time, many people have turned
to religion to give them the kinds of comfort that pseudo-scientific theories
about race used to.  Finally, I would note the following: Fredrickson claims
that religious oppression can be harder to overcome than racial oppression
because it is even less amenable to reason and argument, but he also believes
that religious oppression frequently offers an escape hatch of conversion.
