# Notes on Long and Sedley 62 (Stoic ethics, moral responsibility)

## A-B

According to Hippolytus, Zeno and Chrysippus “affirmed that everything is
fated,” and they illustrate this with the model of a dog tied to a cart. The dog
can—and indeed should—run along in the direction the cart goes, but even if the
dog does not run, the cart will drag it nevertheless. Hippolytus writes that the
dog can “mak[e] its spontaneous act coincide with necessity.” I’m not sure how
to interpret this, given the overall Stoic determinism.

Cleanthes, as quoted by Epictetus, echoes this when he affirms that he will
follow where Zeus leads, but that even if does not follow willingly, he will
“follow none the less.” Cleanthes describes not following as “if I become bad
and am unwilling.”

Hence, the idea seems to be that a virtuous agent aligns their will with what is
determined. If someone fights destiny, they are *de facto* bad and immoral.

These early Stoics leave an essential question unasked: what distinguishes a dog
who follows fate from a dog who doesn’t follow fate? If we answer “Their choices
distinguish,” then someone will surely ask: “What determines their choices?” At
this point, we are right back where we started. As far as I can see, the early
Stoics do not even consider this problem.

## C-F

According to Cicero, Chysippus wants to somehow combine the two more common
ancient views on determinism and responsibility. One side says that “all things
come about by fate,” and they did away with moral responsibility. The other side
preserved moral responsibility by denying determinism.

Cicero tells us that Chrysippus distinguishes between complete and partial
causes, but I don’t understand how this helps his case. He can maintain that
impulse is “in our power,” in the sense that it accords with our character, but
that does not seem enough to preserve ultimate moral responsibility.

An example we hear from several sources is that of a rolling cylinder or
spinning top. An external power starts the object moving, but the object’s
internal nature keeps it rolling of spinning. This distinction is fine,
I suppose, but I don’t see how it preserves genuine agency of the type we need.
At best, Chrysippus seems to say that a bad person’s nature deserves punishment
regardless of whether they are ultimately responsible for what they do or not.
(See also the story of Zeno and the slave in E.)

Finally, the examples in F work against fatalism but not determinism, I think.

## G-J

Alexander makes clear the problems I have with the Stoic theory. As he says with
devastating understatement the Stoic insistence that “it is not possible for
someone to perform the opposite action to the one he will perform suggests an
oversight on their part.”

If I understand Alexander correctly in I and J, the Stoics themselves understand
the problem, but they handle it by doubling down. Actions that are bad violate
prohibitions in nature, and therefore people who do such actions are wrong to do
them. They simply paper over the question of responsibility by reasserting,
e.g., “murder is wrong” without asking if the murderer could have done
otherwise. In fact, according to G, the Stoics specifically deny that freedom is
the freedom to choose between alternatives.

## Commentary

Thus, on Alexander’s account, the Stoics are some form of compatibilist
determinists. Long and Sedley seem to want to deny this, but I don’t follow
their argument at all.
