# “The Ten Tropes of Aenesidemus” Gisela Striker, 95-115 in *The Skeptical Tradition* (ed. Myles Burnyeat)

## Introductory material

Striker says that the ten tropes “presumably” go back to Aenesidemus, and she adds, “Very litle is known about Aenesidemus as a person” (95) She thinks he lived in Alexandria, based on Aristocles. She also mentions the testimony of Photius that Aenesidemus dedicated a book to his fellow Academic, the Roman L. Tubero. She continues “this may indicate that he started off as a student of the skeptical Academy, but later decided to argue for a different form of skepticism associated with the name of Pyrrho” (95).[^1] Finally, Striker speculates that “it seems likely that [Aenesidemus] was the first who tried to present a systematic repertoire of Pyrrhonist arguments. The purpose of the systematization would have been to provide the skeptic with an arsenal of weapons against all temptations of dogmatism” (95). Striker places this activity “in the first century” BCE (95).

According to Striker, scholars have not devoted the right kind of attention to the modes. People have studied “their historical origin, order, and number” (96), but they have been brief, dismissive, or misleading about the modes as arguments. In particular, many scholars claim “that they all follow the same strategy, leading to the conclusion that nothing can be found out about the real nature of things because of what is alternatively and indiscriminately called the undecidable conflict between mutually inconsistent views or the relativity of all impressions” (96).

Striker objects that these two arguments cannot be the same thing:
> Now it seems to me that undecidability and relativity can hardly come to the same, since the first leaves open the possibility that one of the conflicting views may be right, while the other seems to imply either that nothing is absolutely or unrestrictedly true or at least that none of the “relative” impressions can be. So either there must be more than one strategy, or the common strategy is not as easily detectable as commentators seem to think (96).

I’m not sure if Striker is right, and I’m also not sure whether the ancients would have agreed with her, whether or not she’s right. In particular, some ancients seem to believe that relativism is a source of undecidable conflict. As such, even if they do not “come to the same,” as Striker says, these ancients tend to run them together. And it’s easy enough to see why they might do so. Imagine that Plato, for example, wants to know the real color of this book, what color it actually is, the truth about its color. One the one hand, he might encounter undecidable conflict: you say it is red, and I say it is orange. On the other hand, a third person may try to relativize this conflict. This third person points out that I am colorblind in such a way that red things appear yellow to me. So the object is red to you and orange to me, says the third person to Plato. How will Plato feel about this? Is this progress over undecidable conflict? Or is it simply a way of spelling out the very same conflict, in his eyes?

Striker, as well as Annas and Barnes in *The Modes of Scepticism*, want to insist that there *is* a difference. On the relative interpretation, it is simply true that the book is red for you and simply true that it is orange for me. Both views are true, and there is no conflict. Hence, there is no undecidable disagreement. In addition, they might want to add that relativism takes up a question in metaphysics—roughly “How do truths about the world work?”—while undecidable conflict is about epistemology—roughly “What can we know about the world?”

But it is not clear to me that the ancients agree. Plato, Aristotle, and the skeptics tend to run these sorts of questions together. They want an answer to questions like “What is the nature of *x*?” or “What is *x* like in itself(, in reality, in truth, actually)?” They do not seem to accept relativism as a proper or satisfactory answer to their questions. Hence, they do not seem to agree that relativism settles anything that undecidable conflict leaves open.

## Origin, order, and number

Striker handles these issues only briefly since her main concern is the content and structure of the tropes, not their history. Some key points from her discussion of the history follow. Everything below is Striker’s assertion unless I specifically say otherwise.

+ We have three accounts of the ten modes: Philo in *On Drunkenness* 169-202[^2]; Diogenes Laertius IX 79-88[^3]; Sextus Empiricus *PH* I 36-163. Aristocles (in Eusebius *Praep. Ev.* XIV 18.9-10[^4]) gives a very brief overview.
+ Philo doesn’t number his modes, but he seems to have only eight; Diogenes and Sextus have ten, and they state that Aenesidemus had ten; Aristocles says that Aenesidemus had nine. There were many lists going around with different orders; there were usually, but not always, ten modes. Philo and Aristocles may have seen lists with less, but Philo may have left out some too for his own reasons. (Aristocles takes a specific stance that there were nine, so he doesn’t seem to have knowingly omitted one. What Aristocles says isn’t concrete enough for us to decide which one from the canonical ten he doesn’t have.)
+ Diogenes tells us that Sextus, Aenesidemus, and Favorinus used a different order from his own. Thus, he is unlikely to be using any of them as his primary source. Also, Diogenes gives an order for Sextus that is different from the order in *PH*. (Me: Perhaps he is using the equivalent of *PH* I from *AM*? It’s missing for us, but perhaps Diogenes used it.)
+ Many of the examples go back as far as Democritus and Protagoras.
+ The account of Diogenes is shortest, and that in Sextus is the longest.
+ Sextus makes use of the five modes of Agrippa in his account of the ten modes, so presumably Sextus does not base his account only on Aenesidemus. (Neither Philo nor Diogenes do this. Maybe Sextus himself came up with this as an innovation.)
+ Only Richter and Stough have analyzed the modes in detail. Richter subsumes all the modes under relativism. Stough says that they all follow one strategy, but she actually describes two types of argument. According to Richter, the skeptics attack the consequences of, what he calls, naive realism. By ‘naive realism,’ Richter means the view that appearances “must be exact images of what they represent” if we want to learn the truth about things (98). For Stough, the skeptics attack something like the Stoic theory of perception, a theory “which is aimed at discovering reality behind or through appearances (sense-impressions), but which defines perception in such a way as to make the attainment of this aim impossible” (98). However, these interpretations of the modes both have a problem: if they are right about what Sextus is doing, then Sextus is doing it in the wrong place. An argument “against a specific philosophical position” doesn’t belong in Book I. Such an argument belongs “according to Sextus Empiricus (*PH* I 5-6), to the special (*eidikos*) part of the Pyrrhonist exposition” (98). I.e., it would go in Book II or II of *PH*.
+ There are two types of argument in the modes, but neither “coincides with the classical argument of modern skepticism based on the representative theory of perception” (98).

## First argument type

Like Annas and Barnes, Striker argues that Sextus uses “appear” to mean more than perceptual appearances. She notes that the tenth mode is about value judgments (e.g., good, bad, just, unjust), and she denies (rightly, I think) that the skeptics believed in anything like a perceptual theory of moral or evaluative predicates. She also notes a passage where Sextus himself explicitly sets aside perceptual appearances, while still arguing for conflict of appearances more generally (*PH* I 100). As she puts it, “What the examples show, then, is that the same objects appear different to different observers” and “perceiving is treated as one, perhaps the most important, case of having things appear to one” (99). But perception is not the *only* such case of “having things appear to one.”

Striker’s larger concern, however, is when Diogenes and Sextus present arguments from conflicting appearances, “the argument is nowhere fully set out” (99). Diogenes, for example, often leaves out the conclusion and some of the argument. If he does give a conclusion, it varies between (i) suspension of judgment, (ii) something about relatives, and (iii) οὐ μᾶλλον. Sextus always gives the conclusion, more or less, as “We can say how things appear (to different observers, in relation to certain conditions, and so on), not how they are by nature or in themselves” (99). Striker finds the same ambiguity in both Diogenes’s use of οὐ μᾶλλον and the frequent conclusion of Sextus. Talking about Diogenes, Striker spells out the ambiguity this way: (a) “the thing is neither such nor otherwise” or (b) “the thing might just as well be such as otherwise” (99). Talking about Sextus, however, she says this: “[the conclusion] may be taken to mean either that we cannot decide whether things are really as they appear, or that we can only grasp the apparent, not the real, properties of things” (100).

I am uncertain how Striker’s two descriptions are the same. To take a concrete example, consider again the color of a book. It appears red to one person and orange to another. Diogenes says either “it is neither red nor orange” or “the book might just as well be red as orange.” Sextus says either “we cannot decide if the book is really red or orange” or “we can only grasp how the book’s color appears not what it really is.” As far as I can see, neither formulation Striker gives to Sextus lines up with her first explanation of Diognes, i.e., what she calls Diogenes (a). Both interpretations Striker gives Sextus appear to be versions of what Striker calls Diogenes (b). Maybe, just maybe, the second interpretation of Sextus lines up with Diogenes (b). If we “only grasp the apparent, not the real, properties of things,” then perhaps this means that the object is neither red nor orange. That seems unlikely, but maybe. I definitely don’t see how “we cannot decide if the book is really red or orange” equals “the book is neither red nor orange.”

I also doubt that Sextus would be comfortable with the neither-nor reading since it would seem dogmatic by his lights. If Sextus asserts “the book is neither red nor orange,” what could he mean? Well first, he can’t mean that it’s *really* or *by nature* not red or orange since he can’t make any assertions that way. And if we weaken the assertion by swapping “appears” for “is,” which Sextus says we should often do (*PH* I 198-208), we have a new problem. Sextus can easily assert “the book appears neither red nor orange” provided that it does not appear to him red or orange. But this wasn’t the original situation. However the book appears to the skeptic, the skeptic reports the appearance as such. Sextus makes very clear that skeptics do *not* deny the appearances they actually have (*PH* I 19-20). (I.e., they don’t in that way cheat in argument.)

Hence, even if there is a linguistic ambiguity, as Striker asserts, I think that in practical terms there is no real ambiguity. Sextus makes very clear, I think, that he means what Striker calls argument (b) when she discusses Diogenes. The book appears one way to one person and another way to another person, and for all we know it might just as well be either. Hence, we should suspend judgment. Although Diogenes may be less clear about the larger skeptical position, I think that out of charity we should take his view also to be (b).

In any case, Striker fills out what she considers the first type of argument as follows (100):
1. The same things produce different impressions in different kinds of animals;
1. it is impossible to decide which (impressions) are correct (both in 61)
1. hence we can say how the underlying thing appears to us, but we will suspend judgment as to how it is with regard to nature. (59; cf. DL IX 79)

Striker things that Sextus is correct that the first premise does not especially belong to the skeptic. That is, the skeptic certainly makes use of the first premise, but it is not a dogma of the skeptic’s. On the contrary, the first premise appears to be “a fact that presents itself to other philosophers as well and indeed to all human beings (*PH* I 210-211). It neither requires nor relies on any special or particular theory. Striker views it as a “common notion,” and she thinks of it as a simple generalization of ordinary observations such as one person thinking the dish is too sweet and another thinking it’s not sweet enough.

The second premise, however, “sets us on the road to skepticism,” as Striker puts it (100). She notes that there is a tacit denial that multiple conflicting impressions be true together. She also argues that there must be another tacit assumption “that what holds of a thing ‘by nature’ holds of it permanently” (100). Otherwise, we could remove the contradiction by blaming “the differences in impressions” on “changes in the underlying objects” (100).[^5]

Striker lays out three arguments that Sextus gives on behalf of the second premise.
1. An equal-authority argument: “each party to the dispute has as good a claim to be correct as any other” (100).
1. Reason cannot be invoked to decide what the senses cannot (*PH* I 99 and 128).
1. No proof can be given for any view since any attempt to give a proof leads to an infinite regress or a vicious circle.
Striker focuses on the first argument. She says the second is too brief and it wrongly assumes that the conflicts only occur between sense impressions.[^6] The third brings in the five modes of Agrippa, and she wants to focus on the original ten modes.[^7] This leaves the equal-authority argument.

According to Striker, the *isosthenēs* or *anepirkitos diaphōnia* (equally-strong or undecidable disagreement) argument relies “on the assumption that the question which of the conflicting impressions may be correct must be decided on the basis of the authority of the observer.” They rule out appeals to majority by noting that it’s not really feasible to determine what the majority is: will we count everyone? They rule out appeals to normal or healthy observers by arguing that the perceptions of an insane person or sick person are normal for a person in that state. (They also argue, I believe, that it is impossible for us to say what is normal in any evaluative sense.) Appeals to “the superior wisdom of some” (101) won’t work since philosophers (who are allegedly superior in wisdom?) notoriously argue among themselves. Also, who gets to decide who is a wise person? Finally, the skeptics offer an argument somewhat like modern arguments that (i) every point of view may produce distortion, (ii) there is no judgment without a point of view, and therefore (ii) no judge is impartial. We can say how things appear to this or that observer, but we cannot say how things are in themselves.

Stiker argues that Richter and Stough are wrong to believe that the skeptics rely on “any specific theory of perception” or “naïve assumptions about how features are ascribed to things”[^8] (102-Stough, 104—Richter). Instead, the “force of the undecidability argument…lies in the assumptions a) that different impressions contradict one another, and b) that the question which view is correct is a question of establishing authority” (102). Rather than take the modes as a “*reductio ad absurdum* of a specific theory, we should perhaps try to take them at their face value, that is, as arguments directed agains the thesis denied by their conclusion, namely, the thesis that we can indeed say how things really are, not only how they appear to different observers—or, to use Diogenes’ version of the conclusion, that things are one way rather than another” (104).

## Second argument type


[^1]: Note how tentative Striker is here. Many writers now take it for granted that Aenesidemus began as an Academic, grew disillusioned with the dogmatism of the later Academy, and returned to a more radical, Pyrrhonian form of skepticism.

[^2]: Annas and Barnes give 169-205 for Philo.

[^3]: Annas and Barnes give 78-88 for Diogenes Laertius.

[^4]: This is what Striker says, but the actual reference to the modes is 18.11-12. (Annas and Barnes give 11-12.)

[^5]: I’m not sure how this would affect Steven Everson’s argument in his review of Annas and Barnes.

[^6]: She thinks that Sextus borrowed this argument from something Carneades used against the Stoics, and she refers to *M* VII 165.

[^7]: However, Striker discusses the eight modes against causal explanations (101 and 114, note 5). She claims that these modes were “drawn up to show that attempts by the dogmatists to resolve the puzzles set out in the old Tropes would not work.” (By “old Tropes,” Striker means the ten modes.) She also suggests that the eight modes would respond to arguments like those of Stephen Everson, in “Conflicting Appearances.” As she puts it, “One…way of dealing with conflicting perceptual appearances would seem to be explaining them as the results of a consistent set of causal factors. The best example for such an attempt in ancient times is probably Epicureanism. But as the Tropes against causal explanation show, such attempts had not been successful: they only served to reproduce the conflict on the theoretical level” (114). I’m not quite sure what Striker means by “reproduce the conflict on the theoretical level.”

[^8]: Richter has in mind a view he calls “naïve realism,” which assumes that “if we are to find out the truth about the nature of things, appearances of impressions must be exact images of what they represent” (98). Striker makes a very strong case that the skeptics do *not* assume or rely on any such realism.
