# Notes on *Four Views of Free Will*

## A Brief Introduction to Some Terms and Concepts

### Basic Concepts

First, this (uncredited) introduction defines key terms and concepts.[^1]
First, the introduction lists the three most important concepts for this
volume: free will, moral responsibility, and determinism.

+ Free will is difficult to define in a neutral way.  Some authors in this
  volume believe that free will "requires 'alternative possibilities' or the
  power to do otherwise" (1).  Other authors in this volume believe that free
  will "requires that we are the 'ultimate sources' of our free action or the
  ultimate sources of our wills to perform free actions" (1).
+ The phrase *moral responsibility* in this volume does not refer to ordinary
  responsibility or obligation, such as obligations that arise from social
  role, family, or law.  Instead, *moral responsibility* in this volume refers
  to "a kind of status connected to judgments and/or practices of moral praise
  and blame" (2).  Presumably, these practices of moral praise and blame have
  something special about them that makes them *moral* rather than ordinary
  praise and blame.  (This may be an illusion, however.)
+ *Determinism* refers to "the thesis that at any time (at least right up to
  the very end) the universe has exactly one physically possible future" (2).
  Crucially, though the introduction does not say this explicitly, this
  definition of determinism rules out free will if free will requires
  something like the power to do otherwise or alternative possibilities.
  (However, that depends on how we understand *alternative possibilities*.)
  The introduction claims that most philosophers and physicists *deny* that
  the universe is deterministic.  (I thought otherwise, and I should look into
  this.)

### Philosophical Responses

We can divide the philosophical field by how they respond to the puzzles I've
mentioned.

+ First, we can distinguish between incompatibilism and compatibilism.
  Incompatibilists believe that free will is not compatible with determinism.
  Compatibilists believe that free will is compatible with determinism.  Note
  that you can accept or deny free will irrespective of whether you are
  a compatibilist or incompatibilist.  You can be a compatibilist but deny the
  existence of free will for some reason other than determinism.  And you can
  be an incompatibilist and accept or deny free will for reasons other than
  determinism.  In addition, note that compatibilists and incompatibilists may
  be talking past one another.  If they define free will and determinism in
  different ways, then they are not (really) answering the same question.
+ In this debate, *libertarians* are philosophers who are incompatibilists but
  who argue that we have free will.  (This type of libertarianism has nothing
  to do with politics.)
+ This volume uses the term *hard incompatibilism* to describe the view that
  (1) incompatibilism is correct and (2) we lack free will.  This term refers
  to an older term (from William James), namely *hard determinism*.  According
  to hard determinism, (1) we lack free will (2) because the world is
  deterministic.  What hard incompatibilists say, on the other hand, is (1) we
  lack free will (2) whether or not determinism is true.
+ Next we have *semicompatibilism*.  A semicompatibilist believes that
  "responsibility is compatible with determinism" but also that "free will
  understood in some particular way might not be compatible with determinism"
  (4).
+ Finally, there is *revisionism*.  According to revisionists, we need to
  revise our commonsense views of free will.  If we do so, then we find that
  free will and moral responsibility exist, but (also) that they are very
  different from what we currently assume that they are.

[^1]: Unless I say otherwise, all notes refer to *Four Views of Free Will*.

## Chapter 1: Libertarianism (Robert Kane)

### Determinism and the Garden of Forking Paths

According to Kane, determinism is what motivates the problem of free will.
People worry when they think that "their actions might be determined or
necessitated by factors unknown to them and beyond their control" (5).  The
exact form of determination varies.  Some people worry about fate, others
about god (or gods), and others about physics, heredity, the environment or
other factors.  In all these cases, however, something that is (1) external
and (2) beyond our power to change or control threatens to determine our
actions.  We feel that our actions do not come from us.  Kane claims that the
threat focuses on the following idea of determinism: "given the past and the
laws of natureâ€¦, there is only one possible future.  Whatever happens is
therefore inevitable or necessary (it cannot but occur), given the past and
the laws" (5).

On the other side, Kane explains that free will requires that we have
alternatives to choose from.  Things are up to us in the right way when (1) we
want to do what we do and (2) we could have done otherwise.  Kane cites
Aristotle: "when acting is 'up to us,' so is not acting" (5).  Thus, we must
have or control our reasons for doing things.  Those reasons cannot  be
"outside us" and "beyond our control" (5).

Kane borrows a phrase from Borges, and he says that this picture of free will
requires "a garden of forking paths" (6).  Kane imagines a person who has just
graduated and is choosing between two jobs in two cities.  The person believes
that it is up to her which job and which city she chooses.  Both choices are
open to her; thus, her path forks here.

On the other hand, if determinism is true, then it seems to deny that there
genuinely are forking paths.  However the new graduate may feel, given the
state of the universe and the laws of nature, only one path forward is
possible.

In addition to undermining our beliefs about free will, determinism also
undermines our beliefs about responsibility.  We find it hard to morally
praise or blame an agent if we do not believe that their actions were "up to
them."  To the degree that we hold their parents, their culture, their
addictions, or their history responsible, we may *not* hold individual agents
responsible.  We can accept that external factors play some role in how
individuals develop and what they do, but it seems that we must also believe
that there is some area left for the individual to choose.  If they are
literally compelled, then we may not blame or praise them (6-7).

Kane sums up this first section by setting out some crucial definitions.
According to Kane, people who believe that free will and determinism cannot
both be true are *incompatibilists*.  People who are incompatibilists and who
believe that free will exists are *libertarians*.  In order to maintain free
will in the face of incompatibilism, libertarians deny determinism (7).

## Modern Challenges to Libertarian Free Will

Kane says that his libertarian view has a good pedigree.  First, it represents
"the traditional idea of free will that has been in dispute for centuries" by
philosophers.  Second, this same libertarian view is "what many ordinary
persons have in mind when they intuitively believe there is some kind of
conflict between free will and determinism" (7).

However, Kane worries about two lines of attack against this libertarian view.
First, compatibilists deny that free will and determinism are incompatible.
According to compatibilists, even if the universe is deterministic, all the
free will "worth wanting," (to use Daniel Dennett's phrase) is still open to
us.  Second, many philosophers and scientists believe that "libertarian free
will itself is *impossible* or *unintelligible* and has no place in the modern
scientific picture of the world" (9, emphases in the original).  This second
attack suggests a dilemma: free will may be incompatible both with determinism
and with indeterminism.

Kane accepts that he must answer both challenges.  He calls the first
challenge "the Compatibility Problem" and the second challenge "the
Intelligibility Problem" (9).

### Is Free Will Incompatible with Determinism?: The Consequence Argument

Because compatibilism is so popular, incompatibilists now need to offer new
arguments.  (Previously, philosophers could rely on a widely shared intuition
that free will and determinism were incompatible.) In this section, he lays
out and evaluates what philosophers call "the consequence argument" (10).

After giving an informal version from Peter van Inwagen, Kane offers the
following version of the consequence argument (10).

> 1. There is nothing we can now do to change the past.
> 2. There is nothing we can now do to change the laws of nature.
> 3. There is nothing we can now do to change the past and the laws of nature.
> 4. If determinism is true, our present actions are necessary consequences of
>    the past and the laws of nature.  (That is, it *must* be the case that,
>    given the past and the laws of nature, our present actions occur.)
> 5. Therefore, there is nothing we can now do to change the fact that our
>    present actions occur.

Kane says that most critics of this argument focus on step 5.  Step 5 seems to
rely on a general principle, which Kane calls *the transfer of powerlessness
principle*.  (He abbreviates *the transfer of powerlessness principle* as
*TP*.)  Kane states TP thus: "if you are powerless to change something X, and
something else Y is necessarily going to occur if X does, then you are also
powerless to change Y" (11).

Kane explains that the consequence argument leads to an impasse since
compatibilists and incompatibilists disagree about what *can* means in these
premises and in the relevant contexts.  According to compatibilists, *can* in
the context of free will means *if a person wanted (or tried) to do it, then
they would do it* (12).  This understanding of *can*, however, makes nonsense
of the first three premises of the consequence argument.  Unfortunately, both
sides of the compatibility question view the other as having
a question-begging interpretation of *can*.  Thus, the argument reaches an
impasse.

### Ultimate Responsibility

Kane argues that we should not try to solve this impasse.  That is, we should
not follow other philosophers and debate the meaning of *can*, *power*, or
*could have done otherwise*.  He adds that alternative possibilities, forking
paths, and the consequence argument offer "too thin a basis" to establish
incompatibilism (13).  He proposes looking at ultimate responsibility to make
a stronger case.  (He uses the abbreviations *AP* and *UR* to pick out the two
requirements that free will seems to make on us.  Free will demands
alternative possibilities *and* that we are the source or origins of our
actions.)

Kane states UR thus: "To be ultimately responsible for any action, an agent
must be responsible for anything that is a sufficient cause or motive for the
action's occurring" (13).  He imagines that "an agent's character and motives
(together with background conditions)" are sufficient cause for a choice (14).
Thus, Kane infers that "the agent must be at least in part responsible by
virtue of choices or actions voluntarily performed in the past for having the
character and motives [they] now [have]" (14).  Finally, he explains that UR
does not demand that an agent could have done otherwise for every act in their
life, but it does demand that they could have done otherwise for some acts.
The key is that agents must have been able to do otherwise for some acts that
form character.  Kane calls these key acts *SFA*s for "self-forming actions"
(14).

I have lots of questions.  First, what allows Kane to add "at least in part"
to the demand for responsibility?  (He has not discussed this earlier, and he
does not seem to discuss it later.)  Second, didn't Kane say that we could
follow UR as a way of avoiding AP?  It turns out, however, that in order to
make the case regarding UR, we still need AP for at least a subset of our
actions.  (Namely, the SFAs.)

Actually, however, I realize that I am wrong.  Kane did not say that UR would
be the only thing we had to care about.  Instead, he said that AP alone was
not enough.  So, exactly the reverse of what I thought, he did think that we
would need to deal with AP.  However, we must also consider UR.

So far, so good, but then I can put my second problem another way.  On page
13, Kane seemed to imply that we could avoid debates about "the meaning of
'can' and 'power'" (13), but I think that turns out not to be the case.  If we
need both AP and UR to establish libertarianism, then we will still need to
work out AP.  I am not yet sure whether or how Kane will deal with this all.

In any case, Kane goes on to argue that SFAs are special.  We are ultimately
responsible for SFAs and many other actions.  But it seems that we can say
about (some? all?) the actions that are not SFAs that "we could not have done
otherwise" (15).  That is, UR applies to more of our actions than AP, but AP
must apply to at least some of our actions.  Otherwise, none of our actions
will support UR.

I now see (part of?) my confusion earlier.  Kane does not think that this
section establishes libertarianism.  Rather, Kane is using UR to argue against
compatibilism.  Once we, as Kane says, move UR "to center stage in free will
debates," we threaten compatibilism with a regress.  "[U]nless some actions in
the agent's life historyâ€¦were undetermined," then "an impossible infinite
regress of past actions would be required" to support UR (15).  Thus,
compatibilism fails since compatibilists deny that any of our actions support
AP in the libertarian sense.  To put this another way, compatibilists accept
determinism, and determinism appears to make UR impossible---if Kane's
argument is correct.

Kane concludes this section by saying that we can only stop the regress is we
acknowledge "that *some* acts in our life histories must lack *sufficient*
causes altogether, and hence must be undetermined, if we are to be the
ultimate sources or grounds of, and hence ultimately responsible for, our own
wills" (16).

### Ultimate Responsibility and Alternative Possibilities

Kane surprises me here by claiming that the argument he just made "does not
mention the condition of *alternative possibilities* or AP at all" (16).
Since Kane clearly mentions AP during his explanation of the argument from
ultimate responsibility, I am confused.  Kane resolves this apparent problem by
saying that AP is relevant  to the arguments about free will even if AP is not
required for the argument from UR to go through.  As Kane puts it, "The
argument from URâ€¦focuses on the sources or origins of what we actually do
rather than on the power to do otherwise" (16).

Kane likes that the argument from UR shifts the focus from questions about
"can" to questions about the sources or explanations of "our wills,
characters, and purposes" (16).  If we follow the argument from UR, we ask
what forms our personality and character.  Does God, fate, our genes, our
environment, or we create our character?  Kane believes that the latter
questions are at "the core of the traditional problem of free will" (16).
Nevertheless, AP still matters for free will because "*UR entails AP* for at
least *some* free actions" (17).

Before Kane explains how UR entails AP, however, Kane explains that AP is not
sufficient for free will even if it may be necessary for free will.  To prove
this claim, Kane refers to what he calls "Austin-style examples" (17).  In all
of these examples, we find an agent who has alternative possibilities and
whose actions are undetermined.  Nevertheless, the agent lacks free will.
Here is one such example.  Imagine a person needs to make a short putt in
order to win a golf match.  As a result of a twitch, the golfer misses.  We
can imagine that the twitch is the result of quantum indeterminacy if we like.
Nevertheless, Kane and Austin believe that the person could have made the
putt.  Thus, the golfer could have done otherwise.  Thus, the golfer acts in
a way that is undetermined, and they could have done otherwise.  Nevertheless,
the golfer does not freely miss the putt.

I don't buy the examples or their use here.  I am inclined to deny that the
person could have done otherwise---at least in the relevant sense.  The point
of AP is that we want the person to be able *to choose* otherwise.
