# *The Constitution of Selves* Marya Schechtman (Cornell, 1996)


## Introduction

According to Schechtman, contemporary philosophers misunderstand personal identity and, as a result, they fail to solve the problem they set themselves. Schechtman believes that there are several different problems about personal identity. She identifies two in particular: (i) the reidentification question: what makes someone now, the same person as an earlier or later person? and (ii) the characterization question: what psychological features make someone the person that they are? Philosophers make two mistakes. First, they focus exclusively on the reidentification question. Second, they drag elements from the characterization question into their work on the reidentification question. (Since they don't distinguish the two questions, they may be aware that they have introduced these elements, but they do not realize that they should not.)

If we focus on the characterization question, we have very practical considerations in mind. Personal identity provides the foundation for four basic aspects of life: (i) survival, (ii) moral responsibility, (iii) self-interested concern, and (iv) compensation. Schechtman calls these the "four features." Ordinary people care about the four features before they engage in any philosophical study of personal identity, and questions about the four features demand attention in everyday life.

Contemporary philosophers test their reidentification theories on the basis of the four features, but Schechtman argues that they should not. A characterization theory can account for the four features and their place in our lives. But even if we had a successful reidentification theory, Schechtman believes that it could not account for the four features. Philosophers who abuse a reidentification theory in order to account for the four features will misunderstand both reidentification and the four features themselves.

## Chapter 1: The Reidentification Question

### Reidentification criteria

When contemporary philosophers tackle the reidentification question, they address a specific instance of a more general metaphysical problem. The problem is this: what is the criterion of identity over time for objects. A criterion can be epistemological or metaphysical. It can concern how we know something or how something is what it is. In this case, we are concerned primarily with the metaphysical criterion. In order to specify such a criterion, philosophers attempt to give necessary and sufficient conditions for a person at t1 and a person at t2 being the same person.

Philosophers restrict themselves specific slices or segments of a person's life in order to avoid making assumptions. If we are trying to decide what makes Bob at t1 the same person as Bob at t2, then we probably shouldn't presume anything by calling them both Bob. Philosophers handle this by investigating pieces of a person's life. (They refer to these pieces as "time slices", "person-stages", "person time-slices", or other similar things.) Schechtman suggests three problems with time slices.

First, how long is a time slice? Are they instantaneous, static moments out of a life, or are they extended chunks of a life with some duration? On the one hand, philosophers insist that these segments are people. As such, they need to have some duration—perhaps even a relatively significant amount of duration—in order to qualify as a person. A literal instant, as Schechtman notes, is not long enough for the most typical attitudes and actions of a person. On the other hand, however long you make a slice, if it has duration, then the reidentification question appears to pop back up. In other words, if the duration is a year, we can always ask what makes that slice in January the same as the slice in November. The problem comes back no matter how small a duration we pick.

Second, is the slice a piece of a person or of the life of a person? According to Schechtman and others, if we think of the slice as a piece of a person, then we must imagine people as having four dimensions. The extra, fourth dimension is time. This means that a person is not "wholy present at any one time, but only over time, and that person-stages are parts out of which continuant persons are composed" (11). By contrast, philosophers "who believe persons are three-dimensional enduring objects...believe that a person is wholly persent at each time in his history, and time-slcies of that history are not to be viewed as genuine *parts* of a person" (11, Schechtman's emphasis). I don't know what to make of this, and I have a hard time seeing its importance.

Third, are time-slices ontologically prior or posterior to people? Schechtman describes this alternatively as a reductionist or nonreductionist view of people. If time-slices are more basic, then we can describe the entire world without mentioning people—only time-slices. If people are more basic, then time-slices are simply ways of describing people. According to Schechtman, it is difficult (perhaps impossible?) "to be both a four-dimensionalist and a nonreductionist" (12). Schechtman also notes that even a nonreductionist must be able to describe time-slices without describing the person whose life they are stages of. Otherwise, a criterion of personal identity based on time-slices will be viciously circular.

### Arguments for the Psychological Theory

Schechtman sets the debate up as a battle between a psychological criterion and a bodily criterion. (She does not consider a mixed criterion that requires both bodily and psychological features.) Schechtman argues that the appeal of the bodily theory "is probably more immediately evident" (13). However, Schechtman also believes that the psychological theory makes better sense overall.
