# *Ancient Philosophy*, William J. Prior

## Chapter 1 The good life

### Athens

Athens began the second half of the fifth century BCE as a wealthy, powerful city, but by the end of the fourth century, it had lost nearly all of its wealth and power. Socrates lived through this period of rise and fall. According to Plato, Socrates had no interest in the philosophy of nature. He was instead completely engaged in ethics and politics.

Prior depicts a conflict between an unreflective traditionalism and a radical modernism. Traditionalism, which was the default view of most people, held that the values of Homer and the customary worship of the gods were the guides to life. This view ignores the conflicts between different Greeks who worshipped the same gods, and it also ignores the gap between Homeric culture and values and their own. Modernism, on the other hand, began with Protagorean relativism. Although Protagoras himself was a cultural conservative who believed in obedience to the laws of the city a person lived in, more extreme modernists came later. Prior asks (rhetorically?) ‘if tradition and culture are swept away, and the gods as well, what is left as the basis of action, of the conduct of life, other than the pursuit of pleasure and power?’ (6). He cites Callicles and Thrasymachus (both from Plato, not real life) as examples of such radical modernists.

Socrates was opposed to both the traditionalists and the modernists. Against tradition, Socrates believed that rational reflection was absolutely necessary. He was not content to do things simply because ‘this is how they are done’. The Athenians of his time were right to see him as a challenge to traditional beliefs, even traditional beliefs about the gods, although he was not an atheist or straightforwardly impious (6). On the other hand, Socrates also completely rejected relativism (7). He believed that a *wise* person and not just any person was the measure of things, and he compared the conduct of life to medicine or other crafts in this regard. We wouldn’t put our health in the hands of just anyone; we seek out someone that we believe is specially qualified, a doctor (7). (In this way, Socrates was profoundly anti-democratic as well.) At the same time, Socrates rejected rhetoric and sophistical teaching in general as a sham (6-7). He believed that it had the appearance of quality but not the substance.

Socrates shared certain believs with both traditionalists and modernists too. On the one hand, he agreed with the modernists that reason and reflection were important; he respected the value of tough questions and of knowledge, as the Sophists claimed to do. (Although he also believed their versions of knowledge were fool’s gold.) At the same time, Socrates largely agreed with the traditionalists about what values were ultimately right. He didn’t disagree with (most) of traditional ethics; what he challenged was not the substance of these views but their lack of reflection and justification (7).

Thus Socrates was attacked by both traditionalists and modernists. As Prior notes, however, it was the traditionalists who ultimately tried, convicted, and killed Socrates (7). And in some sense their charges were true, though presumably Prior doesn’t believe that Socrates’s views merited a penalty of death.

Via the elenchus, Socrates challenged and demolished both traditional and modern interlocutors. Prior describes the elenchus as follows:

1. Socrates asks an initial question about the definition of a key term. For example, ‘What is justice?’ or ‘What is beauty?’ or ‘What is friendship?’ These questions initially seem simple and easy to answer to his interlocutors.
1. The interlocutor gives a confident answer.
1. Socrates asks other questions, and the interlocutor answers those too. All along this part of the process, the interlocutor thinks that things are easy.
1. Socrates reveals that the implications of the second set of questions contradict the original definition of the key term. The interlocutor must dump either the definition or the subsequent answers, but in practice they (almost?) always give up the definition.
1. Socrates elicits a new definition and the process repeats.
1. This goes on until the interlocutor concedes that he cannot give a definition; he has reached ἀπορία (aporia, a dead end in reasoning). The interlocutor has gone from confident assertion to confusion (9).

Prior also notes that this entire kind of inquiry is new and strange to (most of?) Socrates’s interlocutors. They offer concrete answers and examples, but he wants a universal and abstract definition that fits all cases. The interlocutors frequently make basic logical and category mistakes, and they must learn *how* to answer Socratic questions as well as try to offer substantive definitions. In all these ways, Plato’s dialogues reveal that the Socratic search for essential definitions is new and difficult (9-10).

> [Socrates] decisively changes the focus of inquiry, making it philosophical, and this change—from the concrete modes of thought with which his interlocutors are at home to abstract, conceptual thought—is Socrates’ greates contribution to philosophy. The ability to think abstractly will from now on define the philosopher and separate him or her from ordinary people (10).

Prior sees that there is a conflict between the destructive power of Socratic elenchus and his disciples belief that only Socratic arguments can make you a good person. How can you be a good person when all of your values have been undone? How can Socrates be both a model of virtue and an utter destroyer of traditional values (10). According to Prior, Socrates believed that the best life for humans was the life of justice and virtue generally. Vice harms one’s soul, and virtue benefits it. The best life for a person is the life that cares the best for that person’s soul, and this is the life of virtue (11).

Many interlocutors become frustrated and angry after a Socratic elenchus, and they often aim this anger directly at Socrates. In their eyes, they *do* know the answer to Socrates’s questions, and it is only through verbal tricks that Socrates makes it seem that they don’t. In addition, they believe that Socrates knows the answers to his questions and that his claims otherwise are false and also designed to humiliate them. They believe that Socrates is laughing up his sleeve at them, and that he deliberately shames them in front of other people (11-12).

Socrates consistently denies that he knows the answers to his own questions, but few believe him. First of all, how can he be completely ignorant after years of inquiry? He must have learned something, even if only small or negative things. Second, he also sometimes claims to have certainty (and once or twice even knowledge) in ways that betray his claims of ignorance. Perhaps he relies on a distinction between true belief and knowledge, as given in *Meno*, but if so, he is not explicit or clear about this distinction when he uses it. All of this, for Prior, is part of Socrates’s paradoxical nature (12-13).

Socrates has substantive views about the good life; he is not merely negative. (i) He believed that everyone pursued what was actually good for them—not just what appeared good to them. (ii) He believed that virtue is the road to a good life. (iii) He believed that there was a universal account of virtue that applied equally to everyone in all cases. (iv) He believed in the unity of virtues. (v) He believed that knowledge unified the virtues (or perhaps that the virtues *were* knowledge?) (vi) He believed that knowledge of virtue required knowledge of its definition, and he believed in (some form of?) the priority of definition. That is, he believed that you can’t know anything *about* something unless you first know *what that thing is*. (13-14).

Socrates associates virtue wholly with knowledge, and this is paradoxical to many of us. We might assume that in addition to knowledge, we need some kind of training or habituation to carry out virtuous actions, but Socrates vigorously denies this. This paradox in turn leads to two others: (i) wrongdoing is simply ignorance, and (ii) weakness of will is impossible. We can describe such a view as ‘intellectualist’ because it appeals only to the intellect in order to explain virtue and vice (14).
