# Bernard Williams, “Deciding to believe,” in *Problems of the Self* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973), 136-151.

Williams begins by limiting his area of interest. He is not interested in
religious or moral beliefs. Instead, Williams proposes first to say a bit about
what it means to believe something and then “to discuss…how far, if at all,
believing something can be related to decision and will” (136). For his
examples, Williams will use simple factual beliefs rather than moral or
religious beliefs. (Williams does not say why, but I suppose he worries that
moral or religious beliefs may be more loaded or create additional problems.)
Williams also explains that he will focus  on “belief as a psychological state”
(136).

Before he addresses “the relations between belief and decision and certain
puzzles that arise about the relation between these two ideas” (136), Williams
discusses five characteristics of belief, as he sees it.

## Beliefs aim at truth.

First, we assess beliefs for truth or falsehood, as opposed to many other
psychological states. If someone believes *p*, we can—and often will—wonder
whether the belief is true. However, if someone has a habit *p*, we do not
wonder whether the habit is true. Habits, as such, do not seem truth-evaluable.

Second, to believe that *p* is to believe that *p* is true. Williams puts this
as follows: “If a [person] recognises that what [they have] been believing is
false, [they] thereby abandons the belief [they] had” (137).

Third, to say “I believe that *p*” conveys “a claim that *p* is true (137).
Williams refers here to a paradox G. E. Moore discusses. It is paradoxical to
say “I believe that *p*, but *p* is not true.” Williams notes that (i) this is
a paradox rather than a formal self-contradiction and (ii) that the paradox
disappears if we switch from the first person to the third person. There is
nothing paradoxical (or surprising or unusual) about “They believe that *p*, but
*p* is not true.”

## The most basic expression of a belief is an assertion.

We might expect that the most basic way to express a belief that *p* would be “I
believe that *p*,” but Williams thinks otherwise. Instead, Williams argues that
the most basic way for a person to express their belief is simply to say *p*. In
other words, if I believe that the restaurant is on this block, I say only “The
restaurant is on this block” and not “I believe that the restaurant is on this
block.”

Furthermore, Williams argues that sentences of the “I believe that *p*” form do
“a variety of special jobs” (138). That is, they are *not* straightforward or
basic expressions of belief. We only say “I believe that *p*” under special
circumstances. The details matter less, but the “I believe that” form tends to
qualify—or insist. We use “I believe that” to call attention to our believing as
opposed to merely stating the belief itself.

### A digression

Williams digresses at this point to discuss “non-language-using animals” (138).
He does not choose to deny outright that such animals have beliefs, but he does
think that there are several “reasons…for saying that these are beliefs in
a somewhat impoverished sense” (138). Williams has no problem saying that
animals “take things for things, and that they recognise things as things,” but
he worries about concepts (138). That is, he worries that if we attribute
beliefs, true beliefs, to animals, then we imply that they possess concepts (or
even that they possess *our concepts*). This further step seems wrong to him.
Thus, Williams argues that we attribute beliefs to animals in an impoverished or
conventional sense only.

## Assertion does not guarantee belief.

An assertion of *p* is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition of
a belief that *p*. A person can believe something that they never assert, and
people fail to assert things all the time, for many reasons. In addition, people
make insincere assertions. Even more basic: people *can* make insincere
assertions.

Williams takes this to show that “belief cannot be defined as acceptance, at
least if ‘acceptance’ is taken as the name of an action which we can overtly
perform. As Williams puts it, accepting cannot be like a public acceptance of an
invitation. He explains, “Belief lies at the level of what makes my acceptance
sincere or insincere; it does not lie at the level of those acceptances
themselves.

## Factual beliefs can be based on evidence.

Williams distinguishes two senses in which a belief can be based on evidence. In
the first, weaker, sense, we can say that *p* is based on evidence simply to say
that the evidence supports *p* but without reference to any particular person
believing *p*. This is an impersonal sense of “based.” In a second, stronger
sense, we can say that some person or people believe *p* because of some
evidence. In this case, we mean that the people hold the belief because they
have that evidence. Other things being equal, if they give up belief in the
evidence, then they would give up belief that *p*.

Williams goes on a tangent now on the causal nature of “A believes that *p*
because *q*.” He notes that this is both a rational and a causal “because,” and
he defends the genuinely causal nature of this “because” against overly
materialistic worries. (The worries are that it would be “a perpetual miracle
that the laws of nature” support causes that are also rational.)

Williams also notes that some beliefs are *based* but not *based on evidence*.
He gives perceptual beliefs as a key example. I believe that the tree has lost
its leaves because I see it, but my perception is not, for Williams, evidence
that supports my belief.

## Belief is an explanatory notion.

Williams presents this last idea with barely any discussion. He writes, “belief
is in many ways an *explanatory* notion; we can, in particular, explain what
a [person] does by saying what [they] believe” (144). At the same time, Williams
admits that you cannot fully explain what a person does by their beliefs. You
need also some sense of the person’s projects
