## Preface

The preface is tiny. The editors say that they are primarily focused on
Plato's Socrates, but that some essays look to other sources as well.
They instructed authors to present and evaluate contemporary views on their
topic, but also to present their own opinion. As such, different chapters
may differ and the editors do not necessarily support any particular
chapter as such.

## Chapter 1: The quest for the historical Socrates (Robin Waterfield)

Waterfield makes a compelling case that all contemporary attempts to
discover the *real* or *historical* Socrates are flawed. In fact, he
convinced me that no such investigation could possibly succeed given the
nature of our evidence. He suprised the hell out of me, however, by
offering his own *real* Socrates in the final part of the essay. Although
readers should judge for themselves, I find his reconstruction to be as
flawed and full of wish-fulfillment as the ones he criticizes earlier in
the essay.

## Chapter 7: Socratic Eudaimonism (Naomi Reshotko)

Reshotko argues that virtue is knowledge, but this definition can only
apply to people. Notice that in *Hippias Major* 295c8-e3, Socrates argues
for a definition of τὸ καλόν that cannot possibly be knowledge since it
must apply equally to people, animals, objects, boats and fields of study.
And Socrates explicitly says that the definition must apply to all things
"in the same manner" (295d6).

## Chapter 9: Socrates on love (Suzanne Obdrzalek)

Obdrzalek reviews the Socratic theory of love, as found primarily in
Plato's *Lysis*. She begins with an objection by Vlastos that has been
central for later work: Vlastos objects that the Socratic theory is unduly
egoistic and that Socratic does not recognize truly other-regarding love.
Obdrzalek rejects arguments that escape this objection by finding
other-regarding love in the *Lysis*. Instead, she argues that theories of
other-regarding love are themselves problematic. Although I worry that this
amounts to burning down the village in order to save it, she makes serious
criticisms of two modern theories of other-regarding love.
