# Descartes’ use of scepticism (Bernard Williams)

> Descartes, whose aim is precisely to replace uncertainty with knowledge (231).

Scepticism serves two purposes for D:

1. It is an extreme example of the uncertainty that is already present in human life (231).
1. It is “part of D’s method for overcoming uncertainty and achieving knowledge” (231).

D strives to create hyperbolical doubt as a positive counterweight to any danger of doubtful or poorly supported beliefs. This is a feature of his “mature method” even before his *Meditations* (231-232). This already implies that D feels that he has control of his scepticism, in a way that many other thinkers do not. Williams compares D’s method to that of Ayer in *Problems of Knowledge*. He then adds, “The Cartesian, however, resembles the Pyrrhonist, in deploying a scepticism which he has intelligibly shaped to his own purposes, in the one case of satisfying the desire for knowledge, in the other of banishing it” (232).

D believes that he has met the sceptical challenge in such a way as to banish it fully. He strives to raise doubts as extreme as anything in the sceptic’s arsenal, and he suggests that he is familiar with both ancient and contemporary scepticism. He hopes to prevent any later counter-attack by sceptics against the position that he goes on to develop.

Williams also argues that the extremity of D’s doubt is part of *why* he can defeat scepticism: “If the ancient sceptics had persisted far enough in their doubt, they could have transcended it”. Although Williams doesn’t elaborate, the idea seems to be that doubt taken far enough will run aground against a certainty. And that certainty will allow (force?) one to rebuild a set of beliefs free from doubt. Williams cites Burnyeat’s “Idealism and Greek Philosophy” here, and I wonder if he has in mind Burnyeat’s general idea that the sceptic cannot fully live his scepticism.

Williams discerns three distinct levels of doubt in D’s arguments, and he believes that D too saw these three levels. First, there are “the common illusions of the senses”. These are merely a preliminary move by D. They don’t hold his attention. Dreaming takes us from this first stage of common error to the idea that “on each occasion of supposed perception, one can properly think ‘I might be mistaken *now*’“ (234). The first type of error resists generalization, but the second type forces generalized doubt. The third and final stage goes beyond the thought that, on each particular occasion, we might be deceived to reach the radical idea that we might be deceived *on every occasion*. The (alleged) external world might be entirely an illusion. It might not exist at all, or it might be a systematic, fundamental misunderstanding (235). This radical doubt relies on and requires the thought experiment of the evil demon. D calls this last level of doubt, appropriately, “hyperbolical”.

An important point is that for D, the truly serious reasons for doubt do not, and probably cannot, stem from empirical considerations. For that reason, D does not draw very heavily on the immense amount of everyday, empirical cases found in Montaigne or Sextus (236). D must reach for the extremity of the thought experiment in order to reach the level of doubt he aspires to. Where D did make use of this old material (the famous “reheated cabbage”), it was primiarly because they were “helpful in the business of getting used to thinking about corporeal things (in particular) in a certain way” (236).

For Pyrrhonists, according to Williams, *isothenia* is the end, or result, of philosophical reflection, but “the hyperbolical doubt could not possibly, for D, have constituted the conclusion of anything” (237). Instead, Williams explains that if he had been unable to transcend the doubt he created, D would have given up science. For him, the pursuit of scientific results depends on the possibility of knowledge beyond doubting. D could not have accepted what Williams calls ‘operationalism’, as other philosophers of his time did.

D’s three levels of doubt correspond to three types of error, each of which has a different diagnosis, or cure. The hyperbolical doubt would produce universal error. Insofar as it relies on the evil demon to get started, the truth of a benevolent god dispels this doubt and worries about universal error. The dreaming argument introduces the possibility of systematic error. According to Williams, this turns out to be *true* for D. For example, our entire understanding of nature is incorrect. However, science is capable of curing us of this type of error. Local or one-off mistakes cannot be eliminated nor denied. But their scope can be restricted by careful attention, and the progress of science helps to correct specific local errors from leading us too far astray.

Williams interprets D’s foundationalism in light of D’s rejection of the senses. Williams agrees with Margaret Wilson that D believes that “*we are* systematically deceived by our senses” (238). And, according to Williams, this is why the sciences must be given foundations. Williams interprets these foundations not as axioms that we derive further knowledge from, but as a beginning cleansed of all elementary error.

Williams explains D’s desire for absolute certainty, beyond the reach of any doubt, by reference to history and an intuitive picture of knowledge. On the one hand, D’s world was one torn between violently different religious and scientific views. It was not a world where a “probabilistic and corrigibilist conception” of science could take hold (238). On the other hand, on a natural and intuitive view of knowledge, knowledge is maximally independent of any particular inquirer. Knowledge of this kind is, to put it in William’s favored way, absolute. D in particular, however, connects this kind of knowledge with certainty. This again Williams explains historically. From D’s vantage point, if a claim to knowledge is not certain, then it must be relative to some particular circumstances. Therefore, insofar as knowledge strives to be absolute, it also strives to be certain.

D believes that genuine knowledge was immune to both disagreement and doubt. First, it could not be disagreed with since simply to recognize one of these truths was to assent to it (240). Second, D believes that he has put us in a position where doubt will not recur, even when we are not actively concentrating on matters. It’s less clear to me what argument Williams finds for this. Perhaps it is the circular argument concerning god and clear and distinct perceptions that begins on the bottom of 241. (Yes, this is correct. See the longer version of this interpretation that begins on the bottom of 243.)

Williams largely rejects the idea that clear and distinct perceptions are a criterion of truth for D. He argues thus:

1. The idea of a proposition’s being true is not the same for D as the idea of someone clearly and distinctly perceiving it.
1. D does not think that we can decide that a proposition is true on the basis of our perceiving it clearly and distinctly because such propositions are irresistable. There is no gap between having a clear and distinct perception and believing it to be true.
1. D does not think that no (further or other) justification can be given for the general proposition that anything clearly and distinctly perceived is true. He gives exactly such a justification, namely a benevolent god.
1. However, D does agree with the general proposition that anything clearly and distinctly perceived is true.

But if the only sense in which clear and distinct propositions are criteria is the last one, then that’s a pretty weak sense of ‘criterion’.

Williams notes that there are parallels between Descartes and the Stoics on *katalēpsis*, but he focuses on a difference between the two accounts. For the Stoics, kataleptic appearances are a kind of sensory perception, but for D clear and distinct impressions are intellectual. However, this does not mean that such perceptions, for D, don’t give us knowledge of the external, mind-independent world. For example, the existence of god is given to us by a clear and distinct perception.
