# Svavar Hrafn Svavarsson, “Sextus Empiricus on Persuasiveness and Equipollence,” in *Strategies of Argument: Essays in Ancient Ethics, Epistemology, and Logic*, edited by Mi-Kyoung Lee (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014), 356-373.

## Introduction

Svavarsson wants to talk about persuasion and persasiveness. Although many
people talk about appearance in Sextus, people have said less about persuasion
and persuasiveness.[^1]

According to Svavarsson, persuasiveness plays two roles for Sextus:

1. Sextus says that skeptics suspend belief because contrary accounts about
   appearances (i.e., contrary accounts that mean to explain the truth about
   appearances) appear equal to skeptics as far as persuasion and lack of
   persuasion. Sextus defines equipollence (ἰσοσθένεια) of opposed accounts as
   “equality in regard to persuasion and lack of persuasion.” E.g., ἰσοσθένειαν
   δὲ λέγομεν τὴν κατὰ πίστιν καὶ ἀπιστίαν ἰσότητα (*PH* 1.10). See note 3, page
   357 for more details.
2. Sextus also says that skeptics can be persuaded of things insofar as they
   have the appearance that this or that is the case.

Many people believe that skeptics suspend belief because *they themselves* are
equally persuaded by both accounts (at the same time). An important
clarification: people can be equally persuaded if they are “not persuaded by
either account” (357). If a skeptic is persuaded that something is the case,
this can only be an appearance; a skeptic cannot be persuaded by one account
rather than another “since that would presumably violate the equipollence of the
contrary accounts” (357).

Svavarsson, however, argues that equal persuasiveness requires only that
“contrary accounts persuade different people differently or the same person at
different instances” (357). A skeptic, or anyone else, might be equally
persuaded by the same account at one time, and this would be *sufficient* for
equal persuasiveness. But it is not a necessary condition on equal
persuasiveness that one person be equally persuaded at one time. When the
skeptics realize that arguments are equally persuasive in Svavarsson’s sense,
they have “no means to determing by which account *[they] ought to be
persuaded*” (357, emphasis Svavarsson’s). Nevertheless, they may “as a matter of
fact be persuaded by one of the accounts” (357).[^2]

## Arguments and Persuasiveness

Svavarsson argues that the appearances a skeptic ends up with can be (i) “based
on reasoned arguments” (358) and (ii) even be based “on the skeptic’s own
reasoned arguments” (358).

Svavarsson argues that Sextus attributes appearances to perception, upbringing,
and arguments. Skeptics can have perceptual appearances, just like any human or
animal with perception. Skeptics can also have appearances as a result of
upbringing, for example the appearance that there are gods. Finally, Svavarsson
argues that skeptics “can be persuaded by an argumentative account so that it
appears to him that something is the case; he can even change his mind,
discarding one appearance for a contrary one, because he is persuaded by an
account. According to Svavarsson, we can see this most clearly in *M* 8.473-478.

In this section, Sextus appears to say that skeptics can be persuaded by an
argument and yet still suspend belief. The larger context runs from *M*
8.463-481, which is the very end of the two books Sextus devotes to logic.
Sextus raises dogmatic challenges to the skeptical arguments against proof that
he has just given, and then he gives skeptical replies to those challenges.
Sextus says in 477-478 that skeptics suspend belief over a matter when he said
earlier (473) that one of the two positions in this matter seemed
persuasive.[^3] This sequence provides Svavarsson’s main contention: skeptics
can be persuaded of something by argument and yet suspend belief about that
exact same something.

Svavarsson and Striker both use the word “physical” when they discuss the
passage, but I think they misunderstand the point Sextus is making. Svavarsson
says, “Even if the process involves an argument, and one of the skeptic’s own
making at that, the effect is like that of a physical affection” (359-360).
Striker writes “Even the Pyrrhonists occasionally claim the right to find an
argument or a thesis convincing; but this does not mean that they think such
a thesis, rather than its opposite, corresponds to the truth concerning the
nature of things. Conviction is, for them, a state of mind, comparable to
a physical sensation” (146). But Sextus uses the verbs χαίρειν and λυπεῖσθαι,
and neither of these is merely physical. Sextus does not intend a contrast
between body and mind nor a contrast between physical and non-physical affects.

The question remains: why does Sextus say that being persuaded is like being
glad or grieving (*M* 8.475)? When a person is glad or grieves, that person sees
things a certain way. You may be able to make them see things another way,
either by argument, through rhetoric, by telling a story, by giving them
alcohol, and in many other ways. However, one thing that you generally cannot do
is convince them by argument that they do not see things as they do. Sextus
makes the same point about persuasion. Once a person is persuaded, they see
things a certain way. We can change their view in various ways, but we cannot
normally convince them by argument that they are not persuaded by whatever
persuades them. As Sextus says in a parallel passage that Svavarsson cites
certain “arguments passively suggest themselves and appear evident” to someone
(*PH* 2.10).[^4]

### TODO My issues in this section

Although Svavarsson argued above for rational skepticism, he says something here
that suggests psychological skepticism. When describing “the skeptical practice
of opposing appearances,” Svavarsson says this:

> [during this process] the sketpic may compare his own appearance to that of
> another, who experiences a contrary appearance. He invariably finds them
> equipollent after having studied the different accounts of the contrary
> appearances. These accounts attempt to establish the truth of either
> appearance, but the skeptic *cannot prefer* one account to the other (358, my
> emphasis).

I’m not sure what to make of this, but “cannot prefer” suggests an inability
rather than a rational obligation.

A further question that I have for Svavarsson concerns whose appearances the
skeptic deals with. As I read the texts, Sextus often talks about appearances in
a very general way. He attributes appearances to types of people (healthy
people, people with jaundice, specific races or ethnicities, etc.), but
Svavarsson claims that “the skeptic may compare his own appearance to that of
another” (358). I’m not sure what examples Svavarsson has in mind, and in at
least one case Svavarsson describes a case as if Sextus were talking about
himself, when I think that Sextus is clearly not talking about himself. (See
page 358 and *M* 8.53 for the case.)

[^1]: Svavarsson notes that Sextus has two roots that he uses to talk about
  persuasiveness. Sometimes Sextus uses πίστις, πιστός, and πιστεύω; sometimes
  he uses πιθανότης, πιθανός, πειθώ, and πείθω/πείθομαι. Svavarsson claims,
  based on a TLG search, that the first group is more common. He also says that
  “Sextus seems to use πιστόν and πιθανόν interchangeably” (356). Finally,
  Svavarsson tells the reader that he will translate both πιστόν and πιθανόν as
  “persuasive.”

[^2]: There is an important contrast between Svavarsson and Bett. Svavarsson
  interprets Sextus to say that skeptics can’t decide what they ought to
  believe. Bett, however, takes Sextus to say that skeptics simply end up unable
  to choose one account over another. For Svavarsson, the problem is within
  rationality. For Bett, the problem is within psychology. I think we could
  adapt much of the rest of what Svavarsson says while applying a psychological
  account. Think about this later. TODO ought to believe.

[^3]: Sextus goes so far as to say that the persuasive argument “induces assent”
  (ἐπάγεσθαι συγκατάθεσιν, 8.473) despite saying just a bit later that the
  skeptics “make a bare posit of the arguments against proof *without assenting
  to them* (χωρὶς τοῦ συγκατατίθεσθαι τούτοις, 8.476). I’m not sure how to
  square this circle.

[^4]: See also *PH* 1.22: διὸ περὶ μὲν τοῦ φαίνεσθαι τοῖον ἢ τοῖον τὸ
  ὑποκείμενον οὐδεὶς ἴσως ἀμφισβητήσει, περὶ δὲ τοῦ εἰ τοιοῦτον ἔστιν ὁποῖον
  φαίνεται ζητεῖται. The point of this seems to be that there is no disputing
  that something appears some way to someone. In a parallel fashion, you can
  argue with someone “That’s not how it appears to you.”
