# The empiricist attitude towards reason and theory, Michael Frede
(*Apeiron*, volume 21, number 2, *Method, Medicine and Metaphysics: Studies in the Philosophy of Ancient Science* (Summer 1988), 79-97)

## Introduction

Frede first lays out a common situation in medicine and then applies this to the ancient world. Doctors will often use treatments because they know *that* the treatment works, though without having a full explanation (or perhaps even any explanation) of *why* it works.[^1] In such cases, a doctor has what Frede calls “practical” as opposed to “theoretical” knowledge. (Implicit in all of this is that the doctor’s behavior can be reasonable.) Ancient doctors had nearly none of our theoretical knowledge and also very little practical knowledge.[^2] They disagreed about how best to gain more practical knowledge. Some doctors thought that they might gain more practical knowledge if they first develop theoretical knowledge and then derive the practical knowledge from the theory. Other doctors believed that only experience yields the desired practical knowledge (79-80). Around the fifth century BCE, some people began to challenge the idea that medicine was a true art (τέχνη, I assume) at all, and this increased the debate among doctors (81).

These debates led to the birth of Empiricism in the second half of the third century BCE (82). Frede describes this school, perhaps with deliberate anachronism?, as proto-sceptics. According to Frede, the doctors who became the Empiricist movement reasoned as follows:
1. All medical theories rely on questionable assumptions whose truth is not settled, no matter how hard their supporters try to settle them.
1. This suggests that the truth of these assumptions *cannot* be settled; “reason does not put us into a position to settle such questions definitively” (82).
1. This is no great surprise. For “reason never seems to put us into a position to know any assumption to be true, let alone a theoretical one” (83).
1. Therefore, the theoretical approach to practical knowledge is fundamentally wrongheaded. (Because “[i]f a theory could never be known to be true, it also could not possibly yield practical knowlege” (83). What is the status of this belief? It looks awfully theoretical to me.) Whatever practical knowledge such a theoretical account gives us is “tainted by the questionable status of the theory itself” (83). As a result, the theory does not give us what it promised, namely useful practical knowledge to act upon.
This sounds suspiciously like Sextus Empiricus to me, but Frede doesn’t acknowledge this (yet).

In response to such an attack, Frede imagines the following reply in support of the theoretical sect. Even if their accounts do not yield knowledge, we may have reason to think their theories are true, or at least more likely to be true than conflicting accounts. We would prefer knowledge, of course, but in the absence of knowledge, we can at least make do with the best-supported account we have—which is *ex hypothesi* that of the theoretical doctors. In particular, such an account is better than nothing, which is all that the purely practical doctors are offering us (83)

However, Frede’s empirical doctors are having none of it. They do not accept that the theoretical accounts are probable in any special way. That is, they do not accept that such accounts are more likely to be true. Instead, the empricists argue, according to Frede, that such accounts are (all? often?) “plausible”, but that plausibility is distinct from probability. They support such a view with the (common?) argument that in all such theoretical battles, “one can argue on both sides of the question” (83). Frede does not consider the counter-objection that one *can* argue on both sides, but this is nowhere near showing that such arguments are always (or even often) equally weighted.

It is easy to get a false idea about the debate between the Empiricists and the doctors on the other side, who became known as Rationalists. We might come to think that the Rationalists argued for the use of reason and theory while the Empiricists rejected reason and theory altogether. However, Frede argues that such a neat division is not what occurs. Instead, the Empiricists came to disagree among themselves. All Empiricists agreed that “no amount of reasoning...could give us any indication as to the truth of an assumption whether it be practical or theoretical” (84). However, they disagreed over “whether this meant that in an account of how we come to have the practical knowledge the doctor needs there was any place for reason or theory at all” (84).

[^1]: Frede gives the example of Nystatin, an antibiotic that treats certain rashes (79). Modern doctors do not know why Nystatin works on these rashes, nor do they know exactly the structural formula for Nystatin. But they know that it works and so they prescribe it.

[^2]: As Frede notes, ancient medicine suffered from an almost complete lack of knowledge concerning human anatomy. Hence, their ability to deal with anything internal was severely limited.
