# “The logical structure of the sceptic’s opposition”[^1]

## What scepticism is not

M[orison] starts from *PH* I 8: “Scepticism is an ability.” By saying this, Sextus implicitly tells us that scepticism is not like Aristotelianism or Platonism. To be a sceptic is not to hold a set of key beliefs. M does not yet characterize the positive content of the sceptical ability.

M describes and takes issue with Jonathan Barnes’s characterization of what sorts of belief (δόγματα) a sceptic cannot have. As M notes, if we follow Barnes’s analysis, we can characterize these beliefs without reference to the person who holds them. Barnes argues that “x’s belief that p is a philosophico-scientific tenet iff the proposition that p is such as to belong to a philosophical or scientific discipline” (266). This can be reformulated without any reference to a person who holds that p. “the belief that p is a philosophico-scientific tenet iff the proposition that p is such as to belong to a philosophical or scientific discipline” (266). M, by contrast, claims that reference to a person who holds a belief and how they came to hold the belief is essential. “x’s belief that p is a philosophico-scientific belief—a *dogma* in the sense according to which sceptics have no *dogmata*—as one which has been arrived at *in a certain way*: roughly speaking, x’s belief that p is a philosophico-scientific belief iff x has come to believe that p as a result of marshalling arguments, or considerations, in favour of the proposition that p (266).

Although it appears that sceptics *can* have some beliefs according to Barnes-style and M-style interpretations of “belief”, Barnes denies this. Barnes argues that although some beliefs pass the initial test—they are not philosophico-scientific beliefs—nevertheless, to accept any belief is to rely on a further belief, namely that there is a criterion of truth. *This* is a δόγμα if anything is, and so the sceptic is barred from all beliefs after all, even perfectly ordinary ones like “it is day” or “the water is warm” (267-268). M doubts that the conclusion follows from Barnes’s argument, but he doesn’t push the matter right away.

In any case, Barnes and M-style interpreters[^2] agree that Sextus should not characterize scepticism in terms of beliefs. For Barnes, this is clearly right, but M appears to forget that in his earlier article on sceptic belief, Frede says precisely the opposite.[^3] Frede points out that there are “large numbers of views which one in all likelihood would not have unless one relied on reason dogmatically, unless one thought one had arguments which justified these views” (23). He gives the example of “the Stoic concept of god.” However, Frede continues by saying holding such views non-dogmatically is “Not very likely, but not impossible” (23).

[^1]: Morison, Benjamin. Summer 2011. “The logical structure of the sceptic’s opposition”. *Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy*, XL, 265-295.

[^2]: Throughout the paper, M describes his views of Sextus’s scepticism as following in Frede’s footsteps. He thinks of his interpretation as “following or perhaps refining” Frede’s views (266).

[^3]: I’m thinking of “The Skeptic’s Beliefs,” which I quote from the pagination in *The Original Sceptics: A Controversy*, edd. Myles Burnyeat and Michael Frede. Hackett Publishing Company, Indianapolis, IN, 1997 (original article 1979).
