# Pyrrhon, in *Philosophie grecque* (463-473), Jacques Brunschwig (B)

Pyrrho, born around 365 BCE and died around 275 BCE, is the only important philosopher to fall in between Aristotle and the founders of the new Hellenistic schools, Epicurus and Zeno. But Brunschwig argues that Pyrrho ressembles Socrates more than anyone else. Like Socrates, he never wrote anything. Like Socrates, he had an unusual and striking persona. Like Socrates, his odd life and manner attracted a great deal of attention. Like Socrates, Pyrrho gained many admirers and disciples who carried on his ideas, in one form or another. (Brunschwig also notes that philosophically Pyrrho belongs to the line of Democriteans, though he doesn't make anything of this.)

Brunschwig notes the enormous distance between Aristotle and the Hellenistic schools in terms of their attitude towards knowledge and scientific enquiry. Aristotle devoted a great deal of effort to scientific enquiry in many fields, both empirical and abstract; and he also cared a great deal about understanding scientific understanding itself: how it worked, what went into it, and so on. However, Aristotle didn't seem to think that he was obligated to prove that knowledge was possible. And, in particular, he didn't think that *first* he had to prove that knowledge was possible and that *only then* was he justified in going into the specifics of various fields. In the case of the Hellenistic schools, there has been a drastic change. They all attempted to show (i) that knowledge is possible, (ii) that a criterion of truth exists and has such-and-such a nature, and (iii) they believed that (i) and (ii) were in a sense prior to their other theories.

According to Brunschwig, this suggests that someone came along between Aristotle and the Hellenistic schools who created this change, and Brunschwig believes that Pyrrho fits the bill. Brunschwig allows that there is a great deal we don't know about the history of sceptical philosophy, and he also admits that there are several differences between Pyrrho's views and those of the later neo-Pyrrhonians who took up his name. Pyrrho never wrote anything, and Brunschwig takes this to show that Pyrrho's "philosophy was a practice, a style of life and conduct, more than a theory" (464). At the same time, however, Brunschwig does not believe that this prevents Pyrrho from "having reasons to adopt and to recommend this lifestyle" (464).

In general terms, Brunschwig describes skepticism as "a philosophy that tries to show by all sorts of theoretical arguments that no solid base exists for knowledge or even for belief: neither sensation nor rational thought nor any other conceivable means can provide such a base" (464). This immediately leads, in Brunschwig's eyes, to "the problem...of knowing whether the skeptic can live their skepticism" (464). Some modern skeptics, such as Hume, answer "No" to this question, but Pyrrho believes (i) not only that skeptics can live without belief, but (ii) also that a life without belief is the only means of attaining perfect happiness. Thus, not only is a life without belief possible, but a life with belief is an impediment to happiness.

Since we have no direct evidence for Pyrrho's thought, Brunschwig next asks what we know about Pyrrho's life. This only makes sense since Brunschwig has already established that Pyrrho's philosophy is more a mode of life than a theoretical endeavor. However, as Brunschwig says, we know Pyrrho's life "hardly better" than his thought (464). In particular, we find *two* very different pictures of Pyrrho in the ancient biographical tradition. On the one hand, we have the dramatic and striking image of Pyrrho as utterly indifferent, imperturbable, and insensible. Following this tradition are the stories of Pyrrho's friends following him around in order to protect him from harm (464-465). On the other hand, neo-Pyrrhonians deny all this, and they argue that Pyrrho lived an essentially normal daily life. Following this tradition are stories of Pyrrho leading a boring, peaceful life in the country, well-regarded by his fellow citizens and involved in civic life there. (He was even an important priest, or so we are told.)

Brunschwig attributes this contradictory evidence to an internal conflict within skepticism. Skepticism itself, in Brunschwig's view, is torn between a "rustic" or "wild" side and an "urbane" or "civilized" side (465). Brunschwig cites several anecdotes or facts from ancient skepticism that he thinks indicate this conflict.

+ Skeptics argued over whether they should exhibit ἀπάθεια or only πραότης.
+ The famous story of Pyrrho and the dog: an angry dog terrifies Pyrrho and chases him into a tree; when an onlooker mocks Pyrrho, Pyrrho responds that "it is difficult entirely to strip off one's humanity."
+ The contrast in labels "rustic/wild" versus "urbane/civilized".
+ The contrast in stories about Pyrrho himself.
