# Scepticism as a Kind of Philosophy, by Gisela Stiker
(Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie 83, 2001, 113-129)

## Introduction

Scepticism, in several forms, is a standard problem for modern epistemology. Most broadly, some sceptics deny that knowledge is possible. In addition there are specific forms of scepticism, such as Descartes’s doubts concerning an external world, or moral scepticism, such as Mackie’s or Williams’s. In all these cases, sceptics are radical doubters: they “call into question assumputions that are usually taken for granted by ordinary people as well as by other philosophers” (113). Anti-sceptical philosophers believe that they must refute these doubts and show that they are unjustified. (Left unstated is the implication that if such philosophers cannot refute these doubts, then the positive claims of non-sceptics are themselves implicitly unjustified.)

Ancient scepticism is different. The key feature of ancient sceptics was not this or that doctrine—they had none—but rather an action: suspension of judgement. Sceptics do not make any judgements or assertions; they do not consider any question settled well enough to merit a judgement or assertion. Instead, they are “still investigating” (PH 1.4). Thus Sextus distinguishes scepticism from other philosophical schools by its “attitude to philosophical problems and theses” (114); and he would consider modern sceptics to be negative dogmatists, just as he classifies the Academics. Such people “argue for the view that knowledge is impossible on the basis of specific assumptions about what knowledge would have to be” (114).

Striker proposes “to take a look at Sextus’ claim that Scepticism is not a doctrine at all, but rather a different kind of philosophy” (114). As the essay goes on, however, Striker also asks whether Pyrrhonian scepticism should count (by our lights) as *any* kind of philosophy. If it turns out, as it might, that they are uninterested in discovering the truth or proceeding in accordance with rules of rationality, then we might not consider them philosophers at all, regardless of what they think.

On a side note, Striker compares the three-part division of philosophers with a “simpler two-fold division” (114) from Diogenes Laertius:
> Τῶν δὲ φιλοσόφων οἱ μὲν γεγόνασι δογματικοί, οἱ δ᾽ ἐφεκτικοί· δογματικοὶ μὲν ὅσοι περὶ τῶν πραγμάτων ἀποφαίνονται ὡς καταληπτῶν· ἐφεκτικοὶ δὲ ὅσοι ἐπέχουσι περὶ αὐτῶν ὡς ἀκαταλήπτων (I 16).
> Some philosophers have been dogmatic, and others sceptical (literally, “suspenders-of-judgement”). All those who make assertions about things as apprehensible are dogmatic; all those who suspend judgement about things as inapprehensible are sceptical.
Stiker objects that this implies that the ephetics “maintain that things cannot be known” (114). She doesn’t say where she sees this implication, and I don’t think we should follow her interpretation. The only two words that might be objectionable are ὡς ἀκαταλήπτων, but neither necessarily counts as accidental dogmatism.[^1] ὡς gives the grounds for the one group’s assertion and the other group’s suspension of judgement, but it doesn’t state or imply anything concrete about the sceptics attitude towards this thesis. And although it may be negative dogmatism to assert that things are inapprehensible, as Sextus says in the opening of *PH* I, the mere word itself doesn’t necessarily commit these non-dogmatists to any particular views or arguments. Based on only these words, the “ephetics” that Diogenes has in mind might be Academics, or Pyrrhonians, or both. His words are compatible with any number of longer explanations of *why* these people suspend judgement.

[^1]: It’s also worth saying that we need not believe (i) that Diogenes repeats the ephetics exact wording here, nor even (ii) that he gives us anyone’s reasoning in any detail here. The parallelism of the two parts of the sentence suggest that Diogenes is more concerned to balance dogmatists against sceptics than to reproduce either side’s exact wording or arguments.
