Warne, Christopher. Arguing with Socrates: an introduction to Plato's shorter dialogues. London; New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2013. xii, 209 p. $27.95 (pb). ISBN 9781441195449.

Peter Aronoff, Trinity School, peter.aronoff@trinityschoolnyc.org

<u n=http://books.google.com/books?id=gjLW-upBJ84C&dq>Preview</u>

Since there are so many introductions to Socrates, it seems best to begin
with what sets this book apart. Christopher Warne does two things
especially well here. First, he manages to combine two approaches to
Socrates that often stand in sharp contrast. The second strength of
<i>Arguing with Socrates</i> is that it forces readers to think for
themselves. As such, this book should prove very useful to its target
audience, namely early-level undergraduates.

The book contains two sections. The first, which is much briefer at 28
pages, has two chapters: 'People' and 'How Socrates argues'. The second
section spans just shy of 150 pages and offers nine chapters on individual
dialogues: <i>Apology</i>, <i>Crito</i>, <i>Euthyphro</i>, <i>Hippias
Major</i>, <i>Ion</i>, <i>Laches</i>, <i>Meno</i>, <i>Protagoras</i>,
<i>Symposium</i>. None of the chapters strictly require any other, and in
theory they could be read individually and in any order.

Although the chapters on specific dialogues are the heart of the book, the
second chapter, 'How Socrates argues' is one of the strongest in the book.
Warne manages to introduce students briefly but clearly to central
questions about Socratic methodology. He covers the <i>elenchus</i>,
Socratic definitions (i.e. the 'What is F-ness?' questions), Socratic
ignorance and irony, both Socratic and Platonic. In addition, Warne
provides the best treatment of Socratic epagoge for non-specialists I know
of. He shows that most of the arguments employing epagoge are not inductive
proofs but rather illustrations that reveal the concept of a universal to
interlocutors (and readers).
