Warne, Christopher. Arguing with Socrates: an introduction to Plato's shorter dialogues. London; New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2013. xii, 209 p. $27.95 (pb). ISBN 9781441195449.

Peter Aronoff, Trinity School, peter.aronoff@trinityschoolnyc.org

<u n=http://books.google.com/books?id=gjLW-upBJ84C&dq>Preview</u>

Although I have some reservations, Christopher Warne provides helpful
introductions to the arguments of several popular Platonic dialogues. The
book should provoke and challenge readers, but it may also mislead them
(and frustrate their teachers). After a brief overview of the book's aims
and contents, I will discuss where I think the book fails and where it
succeeds.

As Warne implies in the preface, this volume intends to meet the needs of
early-level undergraduates by focusing on "the stories and themes of the
individual dialogues". In particular, Warne strives to look at the
dialogues in a very specific manner. He cares predominantly about arguments
rather than history or personalities. He wishes to read the dialogues
individually: a problem in <i>Meno</i>, for example, should not receive an
explanation that relies on arguments from <i>Protagoras</i>. Additionally,
Warne admits that he sometimes puts forward "controversial" claims in "a
deliberate attempt to stimulate the reader" (xi). Warne does not, for the
most part, argue towards his own conclusions. Instead he tends to proceed
dialectically, considering different arguments without making any final
determination.

The book contains two sections of very unequal length. Part One, at 31
pages, includes two chapters: 'People' and 'How Socrates argues'. The first
discusses Socrates, the interlocutors and Plato. The second covers central
issues in Socratic methodology: the elenchus, "What is F?" questions,
epistemology, epagoge and irony (both Socratic and Platonic). Part Two, at
147 pages, includes nine chapters, each on a different Platonic dialogue:
<i>Apology</i>, <i>Crito</i>, <i>Hippias Major</i>, <i>Ion</i>,
<i>Laches</i>, <i>Meno</i>, <i>Protagoras</i> and <i>Symposium</i>. Each
chapter in the second half of the book contains five sub-sections, always
in the same order: (1) an introduction, (2) a review of the dialogue's
dramatic situation, (3) a look at a key theme from the dialogue in
a general fashion, without any specific reference to the dialogue or its
ancient Greek setting,[[1]] (4) a more detailed look at specific arguments
in the text and (5) a conclusion. Section (4) is always the longest of the
five sections, though sections (2) and (3) often play important roles as
well.

The book treats historical and biographical matters in a fickle and frankly
dangerous manner. On the one hand, Warne frequently disclaims expertise or
a deeper interest in history or biography[[2]]. On the other hand, he
discusses history often. My concern is two-fold: first, he often fails to
give proper references for his claims; second, he often fails to make clear
how dubious or controversial his ideas are. In combination, these flaws
make it nearly impossible for the book's target audience (introductory
level philosophy students) to assess Warne's suggestions. Warne says
explicitly, both in his preface and in Chapter 1 (where history is most at
issue), that he sometimes deliberately says controversial things. But
I think it's very different to play devil's advocate on philosophical
matters as opposed to historical ones. A student can indepently assess
philosophical claims using only her reason and the text, but she cannot do
the same for historical or biographical assertions. I'll discuss a few
examples below to make my concerns clearer.

To begin, let's consider two short examples. Warne writes casually that
Socrates "possibly worked as a mason or a usurer" (5). This off-hand
comment follows very shortly after Warne says that "our concern is Socrates
the character in Plato's shorter dialogues and not Socrates the man" (4).
This suggests Plato as a source, but I strongly suspect, despite this, that
Warne has Diogenes Laertius in mind when he imagines Socrates as a money
lender (DL II 20).[[3]] When considering the notoriously difficult question
of where (if anywhere) we can find Plato's views in the Socratic dialogues,
Warne cites the allegedly Platonic Second Letter (183). Warne says nothing
about the doubts concerning <i>all</i> the so-called Platonic letters, much
less the specific doubts over this one. Again, a naive reader is likely to
take the citation at face value.

Before moving off this subject, I want to consider one longer example.
Warne refers to the excellent reputation Socrates had as a soldier, but he
attempts to undercut this in two ways. First he says "Although he was
by all accounts a brave soldier, he excelled himself in <i>retreat</i>"
(5)[[4]]. Second, Warne notes that Socrates saved Alcibiades in battle, but
he informs the reader that Alcibiades was "a controversial figure who would
later betray the Athenians" (5). In the spirit of charity, Warne may
mention Alcibiades only to show that (some?) Athenians may have resented
Socrates on this account. Nevertheless, that seems to offer support to
a poor line of reasoning. Do we really want to criticize a soldier for
saving the life of a fellow soldier because the saved man went on to do bad
things? And to describe Socrates as being excellent at retreat does not at
all do justice to the relevant Platonic passages. For example, when Laches
describes Socrates at the retreat from Delium, he emphatically does not say
"Socrates retreated very bravely" but rather "if the other Athenians had
fought like Socrates, we wouldn't have lost the battle. There would not
have been a retreat" (<i>Laches</i> 181b).

On the principle of charity, we can consider these views to be deliberately
provocative rather than Warne's own considered opinion, but that's still of
limited help here. Although it may make good sense to offer deliberately
provocative philosophical opinions in an attempt to make students think for
themselves and not be complacent, I can't see how the same applies to these
biographical assertions. Even if Warne is only playing devil's advocate,
why would he want to encourage students even to consider diminishing our
assessment of Socrates by calling his bravery into question or associating
him with dubiously ethical money-lending practices?

[[1]] It is easier to give examples than to explain these sections. The
chapter on <i>Laches</i>, for example, talks about courage generally and
the the chapter on <i>Crito</i> talks about obedience to the law.

[[2]] For example, see pages 4 and 35 (both at the bottom of the page).

[[3]] My argument for this is simple: I don't believe Plato every suggests
that Socrates lent out money to collect interest. Plato's Socrates doesn't
seem to have excess money to use that way, and I think what he says about
money and ethics suggests he would find such a living repugnant.

[[4]] The emphasis is Warne's. In a footnote here, Warne also acknowledges
Alan Bloom's <i>The Closing of the American Mind</i>.

--- Deleted for the moment

The chapter on 'People' is unfortunately the weakest in the book. Perhaps
Warne is within his rights to say that he will not even try to discuss the
Socratic problem. Instead he proposes to discuss only Socrates the
character that appears in Plato's shorter dialogues.[[2]] However, this is
not what he actually does. Instead, he passes along unattributed ancient
gossip. For example, he writes that Socrates "possibly worked as a mason or
usurer." He does not say where this speculations come from. Once he opens
such doors, Warne owes it to his readers to cite references and to discuss,
at least briefly, the credibility or otherwise of our ancient sources. In
his very brief overview of Plato's life later in the same chapter, Warne
takes issue with a common portrait of Plato's career. He writes, "Pascal
confounded this picture of Plato the academic: 'We always picture Plato and
Aristotle wearing long academic gowns, but they were ordinary decent people
... who enjoyed a laugh with their friends ... if they wrote about politics
it was as if to lay down rules for a madhouse'."[[3]] I don't think I fully
understand what Pascal is getting at there, but much more importantly, how
could this vague, airy bit of Pascal possibly "confound" our understanding
of Plato's career? Pascal seems to be simply asserting his view of Plato
and Aristotle -- "ordinary decent people" -- and again Warne does not tell
the reader <i>why</i> this should move us. In sum, I would not recommend
students read this chapter, and I would likely warn them against taking it
at face value, in case they did decide to read it. It is unhelpful at best
and positively harmful at worst.

In his preface, Warne writes that he had a hard time finding secondary
literature on Plato that met his "needs as a second-year undergraduate"
(xi). In one sense, this is surely surprising since introductory works on
Plato have always been so numerous. But Warne goes on to make clear that he
wasn't looking for just any introductory book: "Frequently, arguments
appeared to ahve been plucked from dialogues and appraised with reference
to remarks in other dialogues, which left little sense of [the] whole from
which they were taken"[[1]] (xi). Apparently Warne didn't want just any
introduction to Plato and that the introduction he has written has
a specific aim. Although I have concerns about a number of Warne's choices,
overall this book does admirably succeed in its purpose of providing
stimulating introductions to the arguments of individual dialogues with
little or no reference to other works by Plato (much less other ancient
authors).

Although I have serious reservations about aspects of this book, overall
Christopher Warne admirably succeeds in his purpose of providing stimulating
introductions to the arguments of individual dialogues.

[[1]] There is a small typo here: the word 'the' is not present in the
original.

[[2]] See below for questions about Warne has in mind by "Plato's shorter
dialogues".

[[3]] The ellipses are Warne's. I have reproduced the quotation exactly as
he gives it.
