# Descartes and Ancient Skepticism: Reheated Cabbage?

(Gail Fine, Philosophical Review, Volume 109, Number 2 (April 2000), 195-234)

## Introduction

Recent commentators argue that “there are significant differences between ancient and modern skepticisism”, and Fine will consider this view with a critical eye. By “modern”, people usually mean “Cartesian and post-Cartesian” skepticism. The differences include the following:
+ Ancient skeptics disavow belief while modern skeptics disavow only knowledge (195, note 1).
+ Ancient skeptics have a narrower scope than moderns. Ancient skeptics, for example, do not question “whether they have bodies or whether there is an external world” (196). They ask whether, for example, honey is sweet, but they do not ask whether honey exists. Fine calls this “property skepticism” (196).
+ Ancient skepticism is a way of life, but modern skepticism is (merely) academic of “methodological”.
Fine notes that some people explain the second difference by means of the third. Since skepticism was part of ordinary life for ancient skeptics, they would not have (could not have?) engaged in challenges that would upend their lives (196-197).

Fine claims that although several scholars have written about how Descartes compares with ancient skepticism, no one has considered “Descartes’s own view of the matter”. That is what she proposes to do, by comparing Descartes with Pyrrhonian skepticism. (She explicitly sets aside Academic skepticism in this paper.) Fine also makes clear that by “Pyrrhonian skepticism”, she means Sextus Empiricus—and in particular book 1 of *Outlines of Pyrrhonism*.

Two additional pieces of pre-discussion clarification. First, Fine notes that “Descartes is *not* a skeptic” (198, emphasis in the original). So far from being a skeptic, Descartes claims to be the “first to have offered a satisfactory reply to skepticism”. Fine knows this very well, but will talk about Descartes’s skepticism and his skeptical phase to mean “the skeptical arguments described in, for example, Mediation 1” and his situation in “for example, Meditation 1”. Fine follows Williams view of this matter: Descartes uses skepticism in order to defeat skepticism, but we can still usefully talk about the skeptical arguments that he uses as “his” skepticism. Second, Fine acknowledges that we cannot know precisely what ancient skepticism Descartes read. He doesn’t ever discuss ancient skepticism in detail, nor does he say “what he read or when he read it”. He does speak of ancient skepticism sometimes, however, and he even distinguishes between “Academics and Skeptics”. We also have good reason to believe that he had a decent amount of indirect knowledge of Pyrrhonian skepticism via Montaigne and Charron. We know he read these authors, and they explicitly discuss Sextus. Additionally, Descartes was in frequent communication with Mersenne and others who explicitly discuss Sextus.

## Difference #2: Does Descartes introduce a wider scope for skepticism?

Fine takes up the second difference in her earlier list first. (She doesn’t explicitly flag this, and in addition she comes at the question somewhat obliquely. Nevertheless, it’s clear that this section ends with a discussion of property skepticism.)

Fine argues primarily on the basis of how Descartes viewed his own arguments. Descartes repeatedly claimed that his skeptical arguments were not new. For example, “I was not the first to discover such doubts: the sceptics have long been harping on this theme” (CSM 1:309, from *Comments on a Certain Broadsheet*). Fine admits that Descartes’s say-so doesn’t necessarily settle the matter. He may be wrong (about ancient skepticism or about his own views), or he may be lying in order to avoid charges of blasphemy. In addition, Descartes doesn’t make entirely clear (i) what he thinks the scope of his own skepticism is or (ii) what he thinks the scope of ancient skepticism was. Nevertheless, Fine argues rather rapidly (i) that Descartes thinks that ancient skepticism is broader than property skepticism and (ii) that “it is clear” that Descartes’s own skepticism “goes beyond property sketpicism”.

## Difference #1: Does Descartes disavow only knowledge?

It is a common assumption that ancient skeptics disavow belief *and* knowledge while modern skeptics disavow only knowledge; but is the common assumption true? Fine argues that it is not.

First, Fine takes a brief side-road to consider two different claims about ancient skeptics and belief. According to one view, held by e.g. Michael Frede and Gisela Striker, ancient skeptics have some beliefs. According to another view, held by e.g. Myles Burnyeat and Jonathan Barnes, ancient skeptics have no beliefs. Fine calls these the “Some Belief View” and the “No Belief View”. Fine herself holds the “Some Belief View”, but not for precisely the same reasons or in precisely the same way as Frede or Striker. However, in the end this detour turns out not to make any essential difference to Fine’s larger argument.

As Fine argues, ancient skeptics clearly disavowed (at least *some*) belief. This will be true whether we hold the No Belief or the Some Belief view of their practice (209). Fine agrees with Burnyeat that it “is surely to their credit” that ancient skeptics disavow belief and not merely knowledge. To support this view, she quotes Burnyeat, who argues that “there are few interesting problems got at [by means of skeptical arguments] which are not problems for reasonable belief as well as for knowledge” (209).

Fine then claims that “Descartes also seems to think that ancient skeptics disavow not just knowledge but also belief” (209). She cites a letter from Descartes to Hyperaspistes (August 1641) in which Descartes claims that skeptics doubt *everything* by definition. In this same letter, however, Descartes also says that “in name, and perhaps also in intention and resolve” skeptics “adhere to their heresy of doubting everything”. He appears to believe (i) that skeptics claim to doubt everything, (ii) that they perhaps intend and resolve to doubt everything, but (iii) that they inevitably fail to doubt everything. As Fine says Descartes appears here to anticipate arguments from Burnyeat—or I might add from Hume. This is again a small detour since Descartes may disavow knowledge or belief regardless of what he thinks the ancient skeptics do.

Fine says that Descartes doubts not only “whether he *knows* various things” but that he suspends judgment and belief (210). She offers three brief arguments in support of this claim.
+ First, she cites the first meditation where Descartes says “that he aims to withhold assent from all ‘opinions which are not completely certain and indubitable just as carefully as I do from those which are patently false’ (AT 7:18 / CSM 2:12)”. She argues that when a person views a claim as patently false, they don’t merely question their knowledge of the claim. In such a case, the person “does not believe” the claim (210-211). She also cites the beginning of the second meditation where Descartes says that “anything which admits of the slightest doubt I will set aside just as if I had found it to be wholly false”. I take this to be the same point as the first citation.
+ Second, Fine argues that Descartes believes that doubting (or being distrustful) “involves neither affirming nor denying”. (She had cited AT 7:476 / CSM 2:320 to this effect. What text is this?) Given this definition, Fine argues “presumably when he entertains various doubts in Meditation 1, he neither affirms nor denies, in which case he does not, at the time, have the corresponding beliefs” (211)
+ Third, Fine notes that the result of Descartes skeptical attacks is that he “eventually rejects many of his pre-reflective beliefs”. (As an example she cites Margaret Wilson to the effect that Descartes considers the testimony of the senses as “uncertain and even as false” by the end of the *Meditations*.) Fine concludes, “If Descartes’s skeptical arguments undermine some of his former beliefs, then they presumably challenge not just knowledge but also belief”.
From all of this Fine ultimately claims (i) that “Descartes disclaims belief” and also (ii) that “Descartes thinks there is yet another point of similarity between ancient skepticism and his own: both challenge not only knowledge but belief” (212).
