# Meditatio secunda de prima philosophia

## Subtitle

The subtitle of this meditation is “De natura mentis: quod ipsa sit notior quam corpus”. Clearly the mind will become a central topic of this meditation, and clearly Descartes will contrast mind and body. Readers may not see immediately how this follows from the first meditation, but it becomes clear in time.

## An Archimedean point

After a reminder of the first meditation’s difficulties, Descartes promises to continue his search for even the smallest certainty. He will continue, he promises, even if the only thing he ultimately discovers is that there is no certainty. He compares his search for such a fixed bit of truth with Archimedes’ statement that he could move the world, given a proper place to stand. If we take this seriously, then Descartes attributes enormous potential power to a single certainty.

## A sceptical conclusion?

Descartes considers a sceptical end to his search. He reviews everything that he has already given up as uncertain: sensations, body, shape, extension, movement, and place. In answer to the quasi-rhetorical question ‘What truth is left?’, he suggests, ‘Perhaps only this: that nothing is certain’.

In response, Descartes applies doubt to the sceptical conclusion itself. How does he know that there isn’t something different from everything that he considered yesterday? How can Descartes be sure that he’s finished, that he’s hit rock bottom? Rather than answer immediately, he reminds us that there is some divine creature who puts these thoughts and ideas into his head. This is presumably the “evil demon” thought experiment. But now Descartes applies doubt in turn to *this* idea. Perhaps Descartes himself is responsible for his own thoughts. If so, at the very least Descartes is *something*. Still, he denied that he had sensations or a body. Grant that for the moment, but what follows? Even without those Descartes is not nothing, is he? And yet, Descartes also agreed that the entire physical world did not exist: no sky, no earth, no minds, no bodies. Surely this must mean that he too does not exist.

Here is Descartes’ Archimedean point: “Imo certe ego eram, si quid mihi persuasi”. The same idea holds for the evil deceiver: “Haud dubie igitur ero etiam sum, si me fallit; et fallat quantum potest, numquam tamen efficiet ut nihil sim quamdiu me aliquid esse cogitabo”. Descartes concludes:

> Adeo ut, omnibus satis superque pensitatis, denique statuendum sit hoc pronuntiatum: ‘Ego sum, ego existo’ quoties a me profertur vel mente concipitur necessario esse verum.

That ‘I am, I exist’ is necessarily true follows whenever it is brought forth or conceived by me. (The logical status of this statement is a subject of intense debate.)

## What next?

As powerful as this single certainty is, Descartes is nervous. He must take care not to go wrong just as he has found his first truth. The next question is what is the I that he has discovered. He proposes to answer this in a manner similar to his initial search for certainty. He will review what he used to think he was, and he will peel away whatever is subject to doubt on the basis of the previous arguments. Whatever is left will be what he is.

He quickly rejects the idea that he is a rational animal. He would have previously said that he was a human being. In order to define that he knows that some might say ‘rational animal’, but he will not go this route because it will open up even more difficult questions about the definitions of ‘rational’ and ‘animal’. Descartes does not want to squander his efforts on these sorts of definitional squabbles. He reasserts his preference for his own method of simply considering how the concept appears to him spontaneously (sponte et natura duce).

The natural thoughts about a human being include physical features and basic activities. He thought he had a face, hands, arms, the entirety of his body. In addition, he thought he fed, walked, perceived, and thought. Descartes immediately casts doubts on the physical parts by noting that a corpse has these same parts. (He doesn’t immediately follow this argument to its conclusion, but it’s nonetheless important.) Descartes distinguishes between body and soul here. The body is the machine that a corpse also has; the soul is responsible for the actions of feeding, walking, perceiving, and thinking. If he thought of a soul at all, and he rarely did, it was in the image of air or smoke distributed throughout his limbs. On the other hand, he thought that he understand body very well. A body is an extended shape in space that excludes other bodies, that can be perceived by the senses, and that can be moved in various ways. A body does not itself possess the power of motion, of perceiving, or of thinking. In fact, it remains somewhat surprising that these faculties are found in bodies at all.

When he turns to consider all these spontaneous thoughts about body and soul, only one thing is left standing. Descartes rejects everything he thought about the nature of body. (All of it would be undone by the reflections in the previous meditation.) In the case of the soul, Descartes rejects feeding and walking since he has no body (ex hyphothesi). He also rejects sensation since (i) it requires a body and (ii) sensory beliefs are liable to the dream argument again. However, thought remains. Thought alone cannot be torn from him by any of his previous arguments. In fact, Descartes argues that if he could entirely cease thinking, he would cease to exist. He defines himself as exactly this: a thinking thing. The reality and truth of his existence is thought.

If he is not an assembly of limbs nor air spread throughout his limbs, what is Descartes? He cannot be the body (or any of its parts), nor can be he some physical manifestation of a soul. All of these things he has rejected as unreal. Descartes acknowledges that these things might turn out (i) to exist and (ii) to be no different from the ‘I’ that he knows. However, he will not concern himself with this now. He remains focused on what he can discover about his existence from the inside, so to speak.

Descartes also advises that he should not allow imagination to lead him astray. According to Descartes, imagination is nothing other than mental contemplation of bodily shapes. As such, it is of no use to him. He compares the use of imagination in this exercise to someone who grasps a truth when awake but chooses to go to sleep in order to understand it better. He strives to draw his mind away from imagination as far as possible in order that his mind itself might best understand its own nature using its own powers.

By way of spelling out what ‘res cogitans’ means, Descartes gives a list of activities of the mind: dubitans, intelligens, affirmans, negans, volens, nolens, imginans, sentiens. He then gives an example of each one. Many of the examples are simple and short, but for imagination and perception, he is a bit more expansive. In these cases, Descartes explains that even if the thing a person imagines or perceives is false, it is nevertheless true that the person is imagining or perceiving. In fact, Descartes wants to insist that what is properly called ‘sensation’ is only the internal aspect of the activity. (This will prove deadly in the later history of philosophy.)

Although this definition puts Descartes on the path to knowing who he is, he notes with frustration that he still finds it easier to think about corporeal things than something like the mind. This is a problem since, by his own account, corporeal things are doubtful, unknown, and alien to him. And yet he is more comfortable thinking about them than he is about things, such as the mind, which are true, known, and *himself*. He attributes to the mind a delight in error, and decides to indulge it once in order to get a better grasp on himself afterwards.

In order to focus this exercise on one example of the type of thing that is generally thought to be best understood—particular bodies—Descartes considers a piece of wax in his hands. What Descartes does next is a tour de force. He considers several sensory features of the wax briefly but very precisely, drawing a very clear picture of the wax for the reader. And then he holds the wax near the fire. Every one of the features that he has just described changes. And yet, he says, everyone would agree that it remains the same wax. So, he asks, “What was it that I so clearly comprehended just a few moments ago?” It can’t have been any of the sensory features of the wax; for they have all changed, but the wax itself is still the same.

Descartes takes this as a springboard to argue that it was never via physical sensory input that the wax was known; all along it was only known through the intellectual perception of the mind. This must be so since the wax can be understood and known to be the same although (i) its physical qualities can vary and (ii) the full range of its possible physical qualities is (theoretically) infinite. Since we have not gone through all of these and could not go through the infinite series, it must be that all along we’ve known the wax in a different way.

Descartes goes on to offer what sounds like a modern sense-data argument. We say that we see the wax directly, but in fact we see shapes and colors, and we infer the wax on the basis of what we see. I’m not completely sure that he makes this argument, but it certainly sounds like he does. He makes this analogy. If I look out the window, I see men walking in the street. However, how do I know that they are men? All I really see are hats and clothes. There may be automata under those clothes, for all I know. It is only via the faculty of judgment that I comprehend.

Descartes offers two further arguments that the mind is better known than the senses. First, he argues that know matter what else he considers, he always indirectly proves that his mind, that is he, exists. For whatever he considers, he demonstrates indirectly ‘that he is considering’, and thus that he exists. In the second place, the mind can be more easily and more clearly perceived than anything else precisely because it it what perceives everything else. I’m not sure that I follow either of these arguments very well.
