# Socrate prend-il au sérieux le paradoxe de Ménon?

(Dominic Scott, Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’Étranger, Volume 181,
 Number 4, PLATON (Octobre-Décembre 1991), 627-641.)

## Introduction

Meno’s paradox is well known, but it raises an important and unsolved question: Does Socrates take it seriously? At the start of the dialogue, Meno is confident that he can answer Socrates’s question about virtue (namely, “What is virtue?”). However, he is reduced to ἀπορία relatively quickly. All the definitions that he offers fail for one reason or another. Thus, he is very frustrated by 80d when Socrates invites him to try again. Instead of offering another definition, he poses his famous paradox (80d5-8). Socrates says that he understands what Meno means to say and offers a reformulation of the paradox (80e1-5). Readers cannot agree whether or not Socrates takes the objection seriously or not. Some say that Socrates takes it to be only a sophistical ploy; others respond why would he offer the theory of recollection in response to the objection unless he took it seriously (627-628).

## Section I

Before he gets to the main question, Scott argues that Meno and Socrates pose essentially the same paradox. He needs to argue for this because (i) it’s not obviously true and (ii) many people have argued otherwise. To be fair to Scott he doesn’t argue that Meno and Socrates pose *exactly* the same paradox but only that the differences between their versions are (i) minimal and (ii) exaggerated (628).

Scott reformulates each of the paradoxes into two questions (628):

+ M1: Which thing that you don’t know will you take as the starting point of your search?
+ M2: Even if you happen upon what you’re looking for, how will you know that what you’ve fallen upon *is* what you’re looking for since by hypothesis you don’t know it at all?
+ S1: You can’t search for what you know since you know it and, given that you know it, there’s no need for search.
+ S2: You can’t search for what you don’t know any better since you don’t even know what to look for.

Scott argues first that we should take what Socrates says as merely a reformulation or paraphrase since Meno offers no objection to the Socratic version of the paradox. This isn’t obviously true. First, Plato might intend readers to see that Meno has sloppily allowed Socrates to slip a (slightly?) different question in instead of Meno’s own question. Second, whether or not Meno, Socrates, or Plato noticed it, the two paradoxes may have significant differences (628).

Immediately after this, however, Scott admits that there seem to be two significant differences between Meno’s and Socrates’s paradoxes. First, S1 is completely new. Meno didn’t say anything about whether or not you can search for what you already *do* know. Second, Socrates omits any mention of M2. Socrates doesn’t consider what it would mean if an inquirer happened to find what they were looking for by accident, all the while not knowing what exactly they were looking for (629).

In answer to the second problem, Scott argues that Socrates is not guilty of a ommision because M1 and M2 propose “effectively the same thing” (629). According to Scott, although M2 appears to be about the end of an inquiry, it is actually (like M1) about the start of inquiry. M2 asks about the end of an inquiry, but the real problem, in Scott’s presentation, emerges from how begins to inquire. At the beginning of an inquiry, inquirers set down some object as their goal. We can call this initial object of investigation A. At the end, an inquirer has discovered *something*, which we can call B, and the inquirer must then ask “Is B, which I have found, the same as A, which I was searching for?” It is impossible to answer *that* question since one would have to know the two items in order to make the identification, but at most one would only know one. (Presumably one would know the one that, as Meno says, one has “fallen upon”.) Thus, Scott concludes “Exactly as in M1 the problem arises precisely because one does not know the object at the start of the inquiry” (629).

Although Scott puts his finger on something, I’m not inclined to accept his claim that M1 and M2 amount to the same thing. Instead, I would argue that they start from the same problem (one lacks knowledge at the beginning of an inquiry) and then go on to raise two distinct problems. The two problems are (M1) how can inquiry even begin and (M2) how can inquiry ever end successfully, given the initial absence of knowledge. Thus, M1 and M2 are not the same thing at all, and Socrates has omitted a part of Meno’s initial puzzle, regardless of whether Meno himself notices or minds.

At the end of this section, Scott concludes that (i) Socrates does not omit anything from his restatement of the paradox but that (ii) he does add something (namely S1). He grants that this means that the two paradoxes are not equivalents, but he reminds us that this doesn’t bother Meno. As such, Scott prefers to think of Socrates’s version as the “official version” of the paradox rather than as a restatement.

## Section II

This section works its way carefully towards a dilemma that it does not attempt to resolve. In order to make the presentation easier to follow, I’ll start with his conclusion. (i) If we argue that Socrates takes the paradox seriously, then we run into several interpretative problems. (The details of these will be explained below.) (ii) If we argue that Socrates does not take the paradox seriously, then we must explain why he attempts to resolve the paradox with the theory of recollection, a theory which we are assuming that he takes seriously. We run into significant trouble whether we think that he takes the paradox seriously or that he does not take it seriously.

After noting that there is disagreement in the literature, Scott begins by saying that the commentators who view the paradox seriously appear to have an “incontestable” claim on their side (630). The incontestable claim is this: “Meno’s problem should have the same philosophical importance as its solution”. Scott continues, “We can hardly suppose, therefore, that Socrates dismisses the paradox as a commonplace sophism” (630). Note that Scott has already said, in the previous paragraph, that the theory of recollection is “without doubt proposed seriously”.

According to Scott, however, the real trouble begins immediately after we adopt the view that Socrates takes the paradox seriously. We now owe a view of the philosophical problem in the paradox that is serious enough to deserve the (serious) resolution via the theory of recollection. Scott notes that we must exclude any interpretation that makes the paradox seem commonplace since Socrates would look foolish if he solved a commonplace paradox with a theory as extravagant as the theory of recollection (630).

Scott claims that the paradox only works if we take “know” and “not know” to be exclusive, exhaustive opposites. That is, if “know” means “know everything about” and “not know” means “be completely ignorant about”, then the paradox goes through. But it is “simply false” (631) that this is how knowledge works. Worse still, Socrates knows that there are cognitive states in between (complete) knowledge and (complete) ignorance, namely belief and in particular true belief. As Scott goes on to argue, quite a lot of the later part of the dialogue concerns belief and true belief. So we won’t get far if we try to respond that Socrates (or Plato, or both) lacked the conceptual resources to see through the paradox.

Once we remember the distinction between true belief and knowledge in *Meno*, things get even worse for the view that Socrates takes the paradox seriously. The distinction between true belief and knowledge by itself could provide a satisfactory solution to the paradox. One might have true beliefs about some matter but not yet knowledge, and precisely in order to reach the stronger cognitive state, inquiry would be both useful and possible. Nothing further seems needed to solve the paradox.

Scott is well aware that there are answers to the puzzles he sets for interpretations that believe Socrates takes the paradox seriously, but he uses the plurality of answers as a weapon against them all. That is, (i) there are many competing answers to the problems posed by Scott and (ii) no general consensus has been reached as to which answer should win out overall, and therefore (iii) we are forced to conclude that the text doesn’t provide any definitive answer. (For the record, this seems very weak to me. There are plenty of interpretative questions in Plato about which there isn’t any consensus. That, by itself, doesn’t necessarily mean that no consensus answer will ever emerge or that the text underdetermines the problem.)

Scott offers one last argument for those who think Socrates takes the paradox seriously: Plato should make the depth of the paradox clear to his readers if he wants readers to believe that Socrates takes it seriously. Otherwise, according to Scott, readers might not understand why “the paradox disturbs Socrates” (632). However, Plato doesn’t do this. Instead, the paradox is raised briefly and then almost entirely drops out of sight. (Scott claims that after 80e, the paradox appears briefly in 81d and perhaps at 86b-c.)

## Section III

Scott argues in this section that Socrates “never attempts to resolve the paradox—neither with (the theory of) recollection or with any other theory” (632). Scott admits that it seems more intuitive (“naturel”) to take the other route: insist that the paradox is serious and handle the objections that he raised in the previous section. And he acknowledges that this seems more intuitive *because* it seeems “incontestable” that Socrates introduces the theory of recollection in order to solve the paradox (632). However, Scott insists that despite appearances it is “purely and simply false” that Socrates uses the theory of recollection in this manner.

Scott first describes how the opposing view explains the resolution of the paradox. The paradox depends on the claim that one cannot know and not know something at the same time. They are taken to be exclusive, exhaustive options. However, recollection shows, according to the view Scott will reject, that someone who has known something and still has it in memory (even if that memory is not currently active) can be said to know and not know the same thing. In such a case, someone would be able “to inquire in order to inform themselves about that which they alread know” (633).

Scott replies essentially “Where is such a use of the theory of recollection?” He argues that we cannot find any such thing in the text. In particular, he says that we would expect it to be somewhere between 80e and 82a, but that if we consider that part of the dialogue in detail, we find no such argument. On the contrary, what we find—Scott maintains—is not a logical or epistemological argument at all. We find a moral argument. What Socrates says is that Meno’s paradox makes us lazy but that the theory of recollection makes us hardworking. Therefore, we should put our faith in the theory of recollection.

Scott relies very heavily on the distinction between a moral and either a logical or an epistemological reply to the paradox, but this strikes me as very unSocratic and unPlatonic in spirit. That is, neither Socrates nor Plato are likely to put much stock in such a distinction. My point is not that they are uncapable of *drawing* or *recognizing* the difference but that the difference is not of primary importance to them. For Socrates (and Plato, I would argue, though this might be harder) it is a powerful argument against a theory that it makes us morally worse. So I’m not persuaded by Scott that we can diminish the importance of the theory of recollection and by implication Meno’s paradox because Socrates uses a moral argument against the paradox rather than a logical or epistemological one.

In any case, Scott himself concludes this section by noting that the theory of recollection should not be merely encouragement or, as he puts it, “philosophical aspirin to cure Meno’s aporia” (634). The theory should be true, and according to Scott this is how Socrates’s interrogation of Meno’s slave fits into the dialogue. When Socrates conducts his dialogue-within-a-dialogue with the slave, he intends to prove that recollection is real and effective.

## Section IV

Scott returns at this point to the article’s main question: does Socrates take the paradox seriously? Scott suggests now that his previous arguments don’t settle this question one way or another. That is, he’s argued all along (i) that if the theory of recollection resolves Meno’s paradox, then we should believe that Socrates takes the paradox seriously, but does this mean (ii) that if the theory of recollection does not resolve Meno’s paradox, then Socrates does not take the paradox seriously? Not necessarily, as Scott knows perfectly well. Even if he uses the theory of recollection only as a “(moral) counterweight” (635) against the paradox, he might still take the paradox seriously. So further argument is needed in order to settle the main question.

In order to answer this question, Scott proposes to look carefully at 86b6-c3. In this passage Socrates says that he wouldn’t insist on everything about the theory of recollection, but that he would insist that we will be better and braver and less lazy if we believe that it is possible to discover and necessary to seek answers to questions that we don’t (yet) have. Scott grants that this passage seems to refer back to the paradox in some fashion, but he argues that there is a crucial difference between the earlier paradox and this passage.

To illuminate the difference, Scott refers to Zeno’s paradoxes regarding movement. The earlier paradox is like an argument of Zeno that claims we can never begin to move. This later passage, however, is more like an argument of Zeno that claims that we can never arrive at our destination. That is, Meno and Socrates originally focus on problems of starting to inquire, but now Socrates raises questions about whether inquiry can ever conclude successfully.

Scott also makes this distinction by comparing the arguments in the Meno to sceptical arguments. A sceptic does not deny that we can inquire—in fact, they claim to inquire all the time. However, they deny that anyone can succeed in inquiry. (A brief note here: I think this is wrong. The sceptic, at least a Pyrrhonian sceptic, does not deny that one can start or that one can successfully end an inquiry. A careful sceptic argues only that no one has so far managed to succeed. To claim that no one *can* succeed would itself be a form of negative dogma for a Pyrrhonian sceptic.) Scott distinguishes the two problems as (i) a problem about inquiry from 80e and (ii) a problem about discovery from 86b-c.

In the end, Scott draws two differences between the earlier and the later statements about inquiry. First, the later passage prevents inquiry because discovery is impossible while the earlier passage argues the reverse. Second, the later passage prevents inquiry because it is useless while the earlier passage argues that inquiry is impossible (636-637).

On the basis of these two differences, Scott argues that recollection has work to do but that it does not show that Socrates takes Meno’s paradox seriously. Meno’s paradox raises empty fears about inquiry, but Scott seems to think that Socrates takes Meno’s paradox as an opportunity to answer real problems about discovery. (This way of describing things is mine, but I think it fits what Scott says in the penultimate paragraph of section IV.)

Scott concludes this section with a new question: if the problem of discovery first emerges in 86b-c, why does Socrates offer the solution earlier? That is, why does he solve a problem before he has even raised it? According to Scott, the problem is not “completely unexpected” in 86b-c. He proposes to return to the first third of the dialogue in order to show where the problem of discovery can be found.

## Section V


