# Aristotle: *Prior Analytics* Translated by Robin Smith (Hackett Publishing Company, Indianapolis, IN; 1989)

## Introduction

### Aristotle's Theory of Deduction

Smith takes it as a given that we should understand Aristotle's logic in terms of modern symbolic logic. However, there are two main camps for how to do this. On the one side, Łukasiewicz argues that Aristotle's syllogisms are singular conditional propositions. The antecedent is the conjunction of the premises, and the consequent is the conclusion. On the other side, John Corcoran and Timothy Smiley argue that Aristotle's syllogisms are deductions rather than propositions. Smith goes with the latter view. He argues that an advantage is the Corcoran-Smiley interpretation makes it possible (i) to give a formal model for Aristotle's system and also (ii) to give a formal model for the proofs in Aristotle.

### Categorical Sentences

A theory of statements underlies Aristotle's theory of deductions, but the statement theory is not fully explained in the analytics. We find a fuller version of the statement theory in Aristotle's *On Interpretation*. That theory works as follows:

+ Every sentence that can be true or false (a declarative sentence or λόγος ἀποφάντικος) is either an affirmation (κατάφασις) or a denial (ἀπόφασις), or it is a combination of more than one such sentence.
+ In an affirmation, a predicate is affirmed of a subject. For example, "Socrates talks" or "Xenophanes is wise." In a denial, a predicate is denied of a subject. For example, "Socrates does not write" or "Thales is not wise." (Smith notes that modern logic would "treat denials as sententially compound (i.e., the negations of affirmations)" (XVII), but that Aristotle considers them parallel to affirmations.
+ There is an important type of sentences in which subject and predicate are both general terms. Later readers call these "categorical sentences", and in these the subject is affirmed or denied of the whole of the subject (by using the terms "every" or "no") or of part of the subject (by using the terms "some" or "not every"). E.g., every person is mortal, no person is mortal, some person is not mortal, not every person is mortal. Predications of something to every example of something are said to be "universal"; predications of something to part of something are said to be "particular". There are thus four types of categorical sentences: (i) universal affirmative, (ii) universal negative, (iii) particular affirmative, and (iv) particular negative. In the tradition of Aristotelian logic, these sentences are called "a", "e", "i", and "o" sentences respectively.
+ Categorical sentences match up in specific pairs, "such that exactly one member of each pair is true and one false" (XVIII). Aristotle uses the term "contradiction" (ἀντίφασις) for a pair like this, and Smith will call each half of such a pair the "contradictory" of the other. As he says "In general, the contradictory of a categorical sentence is a categoricial sentence having the same subject and predicate and differing only in type" (XVIII). An *a* sentence has a condtradictory *o* sentence; an *e* sentence has a contradictory *i* sentence. E.g. "every person is mortal" (type *a*) contradicts "some person is not mortal" (type *o*), and "no person is mortal" (type *e*) contradicts "some person is mortal" (type *i*). Also, matching *a* and *e* sentences are contraries in Aristotle's view: they can't both be true although both may be false.

Smith notes that Aristotle uses slightly different language for his categorical sentences in the *Prior Analytics* and *On Interpretation*. In *On Interpretation*, Aristotle says, e.g., "Every X is Y", but in *Prior Analytics*, he says "Y belongs to every X," and similarly for other types of sentence. Also, Aristotle has two ways of expressing particular negatives: "Y belongs not to every X" and "Y belongs not to some X." Apparently, "Aristotle sometimes carries through an argument twice," first with one particular negative expression and then a second time with the other particular negative expression (XVIII).

### The Figures

Aristotle studies deductions of a particular type, and there are three sub-types. In general, all the deductions Aristotle considers have two categorical premises that share one term. There are three ways for this to occur. The common term can be subject in one premise and predicate in the other, predicate in both, or subject in both. Aristotle calls these sub-types "shapes" or, as the traditional translation, "figures" (σχήματα). The term that the figure shares Aristotle calls the "middle" (μέσον) and the other terms are "extremes" (ἄκρα). In the first figure, the middle is subject in one premise and predicate in the other; in the second figure, the middle is predicate in both premises; in the third figure, the middle is subject in both premises. 
