# Stewardship in the *Odyssey*: the case of Telemachus

## Introduction to Telemachus

Homer characterizes Telemachus implicitly but fully when he first presents him to readers. Readers see Telemachus for the first time as Athena arrives at the home of Odysseus in disguise (i 113ff.). The adventures of Telemachus will dominate the first four books of the poem. Here are some of the important features of Homer’s initial characterization of Telemachus:

1. He is alone and isolated. His father is missing, perhaps forever; his mother has to hide within her own home to avoid the pressure to remarry; young men in pursuit of his mother fill his home and treat it like their own, living every day as if it were a party.
1. He is thoughtful and proper. Telemachus sees the guest first, and he performs all the necessary duties of host.
1. He already shows signs of his father’s shrewdness and ability to deceive. E.g., the poet specifies that Telemachus sits his guest away from the suitors both (i) to avoid the noise and provide a nicer meal for the guest but also (ii) in order to enjoy privacy where he can speak more frankly to the guest. Telemachus also lies to Eurymachus near the end of Book i. Eurymachus asks who the guest was and whether he brought any news about Odysseus. Telemachus identifies the guest as Mentes and says that there is no hope of Odysseus returning, but the poet explicitly tells us that he believes otherwise.
1. Although he can be wise and clever when he speaks, he can also be childish, rude, or reveal too much. When Athena compliments him and says that he must be Odysseus’s son, Telemachus denies knowing his parentage. He reveals how tormented and needy he is with his answer to her fairly bland kindness. In addition, Telemachus is rude and hurtful to his mother when he first speaks with her. He is striving to take an adult role and an adult tone, but he fails quite badly at first.
1. He is like a child in other important ways. Eurycleia, the woman who was his nursemaid, still attends him when he goes to bed. She walks him to his bedroom and hangs his clothes for him, as if he were still a much younger child. In addition, when Telemachus speaks before the assembly in Book ii, he says explicitly that he is not physically up to the challenge of fighting the suitors. (Perhaps we would not expect any *one* person to do so, but the language that Telemachus uses suggests more than this.) At the end of this first public speech, Telemachus also bursts into tears, again like a child. See also ii 361ff. for how Eurycleia sees Telemachus as a child.
1. He faces every child’s difficult challenge: to live up to his parents. “The son is rare who measures with his father,/and one in a thousand is a better man,/but you have the sap and wit/and prudence—for you get that from Odysseus—/to give you a fair chance of winning through” (ii 276ff.) See also “*If* you are not the offspring of [Odysseus] and Penelope, I do not think you will accomplish your desires” (ii 274-275).
1. People frequently remind Telemachus of the lesson of Orestes and the house of Agamemnon. E.g., Nestor in Book iii and Athena in Book i.
