# "On Bullshit" Harry G. Frankfurt

This article first appeared in *Raritan* in 1986. Here’s how Raritan [describes itself now](https://raritanquarterly.rutgers.edu/aboutus/history):

> For the last century or more, the practice of sustained reflection has been
> sheltered by quarterly journals dedicated to serving that mythical but
> essential figure, the educated general reader. By presenting politics and
> the arts, literature and cultural criticism to a non-specialist audience,
> these quarterlies have played a different cultural role than that played by
> PMLA, the American Historical Review, or other professional scholarly
> journals.  They have offered writers and readers the opportunity for serious
> thought and aesthetic pleasure, unbounded by disciplinary conventions.  The
> experience they offer is far more than mere acquisition of “information.”
> It is tactile and visual, playful and rigorous. 

"On Bullshit" is much stranger than I remember. Frankfurt begins by saying he hasn’t done any research, and he hasn’t considered other languages. I almost thought the article was a parody or a joke. That is, I thought he was sending up bullshit by performing a piece of bullshit scholarship.

Frankfurt starts the analysis by looking at Max Black’s *The Prevalence of Humbug*. Black offers this definition of “humbug”: “deceptive misrepresentation, short of lying, especially by pretentious word or deed, of somebody’s own thoughts, feelings, or attitudes” (118). Frankfurt next comments on several parts of this definition.

+ “deceptive misrepresentation”: Frankfurt takes this to mean *deliberate* misrepresentation (118, emphasis Frankfurt’s). In part, whether or not something is humbug depends on the state of mind of the person who speaks or writes. That person has to be deliberately misrepresenting things. Frankfurt wonders whether a statement can be humbug if it’s not a misrepresentation. That is, if I mean to misrepresent the fact, but I accidentally tell the truth, can that still be humbug? (As Frankfurt says, accounts of lying differ here. Some say you can lie even if you (accidentally) tell the truth, while others disagree.)
+ “short of lying”: Frankfurt imagines a continuum of misrepresentation where lying is further along and humbug is earlier. In some sense, humbug is less of a misrepresentation than lying, but how?
+ “especially by pretentious word or deed”: Frankfurt notes that “or deed” implies that some actions may be humbug. Also “especially” suggests to Frankfurt that not all humbug is pretentious, even if much of it is. Frankfurt thinks that the same goes for bullshit. Lots of bullshit is pretentious, but pretension is not essential to bullshit. As he says “when bullshit is pretentious, this happens because pretentiousness is its motive rather than a constitutive element of its essence” (119).
+ “misrepresentation…of somebody’s own thoughts, feelings, or attitudes”: Frankfurt claims that whenever someone misrepresents something, they also misrepresent their own state of mind. If I lie about where my copy of “On Bullshit” is, I misrepresent both (1) where the book is and (2) where I think the book is. This follows from Frankfurt’s claim that humbug requires deliberate misrepresentation. According to Frankfurt, Black does not mean that humbug always has as its referent the speaker’s state of mind. Instead, Frankfurt thinks, Black believes “that humbug is not designed primarily to give its audience a false belief about whatever state of affairs may be the topic, but that its primary intention is rather to give its audience a false impression concerning what is going on in the mind of the speaker. Insofar as it is humbug, the creation of this impression is its main purpose and its point.”

I don’t understand what Frankfurt says next. Frankfurt uses a Fourth of July political speech to demonstrate a “familiar situation” where “Black’s account…appears to be unproblematically confirmed” (120). Frankfurt imagines someone “who goes on bombastically about ‘our great and blessed country, whose Founding Fathers under divine guidance created a new beginning for mankind’” (121). Frankfurt asserts that this is definitely humbug, but also speaker “is not lying” (121). Why not? Because, says Frankfurt, “He would be lying only if it were his intention to bring about in his audience beliefs which he himself regards as false, concerning such matters as whether our country is great, whether it is blessed, whether the Founders had divine guidance, and whether what they did was in fact to create a new beginning for mankind” (121). According to Frankfurt, the speaker does not care what people think about such claims, or at least what motivates the speaker to give this speech is not a desire to change what people think about US history. Instead, the speaker “intends these statements to convey a certain impression of himself” (121).

Frankfurt does not say clearly whether the speaker believes what they say or not. Take one example: does the speaker believe that divine guidance inspired the Founding Fathers? If we think that the speaker *does* believe this, then (I think?) we would view the speech differently than if we think that the speaker says it merely to get votes. Frankfurt insists that what motivates the politician is “what people think of *him*” (121). But surely the politician wants people to think that they believe that divine guidance inspired the Founding Fathers. The politician wants people to think of them as a patriot with appropriate feelings about god and country, someone who deserves our vote.

I think Frankfurt believes the speaker does *not* believe what they say. Otherwise, the speaker would not be deliberately misrepresenting anything. But, presumably, the point is that the speaker doesn’t primarily care about making their audience believe the lies. Instead, the speaker cares about making their audience see them in a specific positive light.

In any case, Frankfurt wraps up his account of humbug and Max Black by saying that it works for certain situations but that it does not get at the essential character of bullshit. Nevertheless, Frankfurt agrees with Black on two points: (1) bullshit is short of lying and (2) bullshitters misrepresent themselves.

Frankfurt turns to Wittgenstein next for inspiration. First, he considers whether bullshit necessarily involves sloppy work and inattention to detail. Frankfurt rejects this account because, he says, lots of advertisers and PR people are extremely careful and precise in their work, and yet they produce tons of bullshit. Thus, bullshit cannot require carelessness. And yet, Frankfurt insists, there is still an important connection: “However studiously and conscientiously the bullshitter proceeds, it remains true that he is also trying to get away with something. There is surely in his work, as in the work of a slovenly craftsman, some kind of laxity which resists or eludes the demands of a disinterested and austere discipline” (122). Frankfurt promises to clarify this laxity—which cannot be mere carelessness—later.

Frankfurt next considers a famous anecdote about Wittgenstein. Fania Pascal, a friend of Wittgenstein’s, spoke to Wittgenstein when she was in the hospital after she had her tonsils out. Pascal told Wittgenstein that felt like a dog who had been run over, and Wittgenstein angrily replied “You don’t know what a dog that has been run over feels like.”

Oddly, Frankfurt resists Pascal’s story. He spends two paragraphs saying that nobody could have been so literal and perhaps Pascal simply missed some good natured “joshing” (123). It’s awful—why does he doubt her? (Testimonial injustice?

In any case, once Frankfurt decides to (graciously? grudgingly?) accept Pascal’s report, he tries to explain why Wittgenstein rejected her report. According to Frankfurt, Wittgenstein does not think Pascal is lying, but Wittgenstein does think Pascal has misrepresented things. How? Frankfurt imagines that Wittgenstein thinks Pascal tries to say more than simply that she feels bad (that would have been fine?). She tries to characterize her feelings in ways that are too specific, and that she cannot support. As Frankfurt puts it, “what Pascal says [is]…unconnected to a concern with the truth” (124). Pascal isn’t trying to describe reality (though she presents herself as if she is?). If Frankfurt is right, Wittgenstein thinks that there are minimal standards we have to meet in “the endeavor to provide an accurate representation of reality,” and Pascal fails to meet those standards (125). Worse still, “Her fault is not that she fails to get things right, but that she is not even trying” (125).

Frankfurt finds the essence of bullshit in this story. When we bullshit, we don’t try to lie, nor do we try to tell the truth. When we bullshit, we are indifferent “to how things really are” (125).

Frankfurt loses me towards the end. He wants to distinguish between lying and bullshit, and he insists that a liar cares about truth while a bullshitter does not. I am not sure. Both the liar and the bullshitter want to appear a certain way or achieve some end (get a vote, win a prize, gain money, become famous), and they speak to that purpose. The bullshitter, according to Frankfurt will say anything—true or false—that gets them to that goal. But now, what do we imagine the liar does? Does the liar always deceive even when deception doesn’t help them reach their goal? That seems wrong, and as Frankfurt notes (re Augustine) nearly nobody lies purely because they love making people believe what is false.
