# Introduction (Richard Bett)

## Ancient Versus Modern Scepticism

Scepticism in modern Western philosophy, beginning with Descartes, is
significantly different from ancient Greek and Roman scepticism. Modern and
contemporary sceptics deny the possibility of knowledge, and, sometimes,
the possibility even of reasonable belief. Ancient sceptics did not limit
themselves to epistemology, nor did they advance any theses. Instead, they
took a certain attitude towards all claims: they neither agreed with nor
denied such claims; instead, they suspended judgment. Ancient sceptics
endeavor to induce suspension of judgment in themselves and in others by
attacking other people's claims and arguments

Ancient scepticism is also "broadly *ethical*" (2), and Bett clarifies
that, by "ethical," he means "practical." As he puts it, "Scepticism was
something not just to be talked about, but to be lived" (2). By contrast,
modern and contemporary philosophers view scepticism as something to fight
off and defeat rather than something to embrace. Also, ancient sceptics
viewed scepticism as something one *did*, while later sceptics treat
scepticism as a theoretical question. (Hume makes this explicit and draws
conclusions from the alleged impossibility of living truly as a sceptic.)
As a result, ancient sceptics owed their opponents a response to various
*apraxia* arguments. Note also that the Pyrrhonists claimed that the
sceptical way of life led *ataraxia*, which most Hellenistic schools
believes was tantamount to a good life.

## The Main Characters

Many historians of philosophy consider Pyrrho of Elis (circa 360-270) to
have been the first true Greek sceptic. However, it is exceedingly
difficult to say anything certain about Pyrrho. Nevertheless, later
thinkers considered him an inspiration, and the Pyrrhonists even used his
name to describe themselves. Pyrrho traveled with Alexander, and ancient
sources claim that Pyrrho met Indian philosophers who influenced his
sceptical views. Contemporary readers can't decide whether to believe this
or not. Pyrrho also had Greek models, but Bett stresses that before him
there may have been sceptical ideas, but there was not yet a "full-fledged
sceptical philosophy" (4).

Arcesilaus of Pitane (316/315-241-240 BCE) moved the Platonic Academy
towards scepticism. Arcesilaus may have been influenced by Pyrrho, but he
does not explicitly mention him. Instead, he derives his ideas from
Socrates, though this may have been a rhetorical choice. As a Platonist,
Arcesilaus would attribute particular authority to Socrates. Arcesilaus and
a successor Carneades of Cyrene (214-129/128 BCE) devoted considerable
energy (i) to building opposing arguments on a wide variety of positions
and (ii) fighting with Stoics.

Academic scepticism began to fizzle by the time of Philo of Larissa
(159/158-84/83 BCE), according to Bett. Philo thought that one could hold
opinions, provided that they were held tentatively and without expecting
certainty. At the same time, Antiochus, a rival of Philo, set up an
alternative school, and he claimed he was moving back to Plato's true
teachings. According to Antiochus, Plato's true views were not sceptical
and they agreed with the core of Aristotelian and Stoic philosophy. Soon
after Philo and Antiochus, the Platonic Academy ceases to exist as
a significant school.

A new sceptical tradition seems to have begun from the ashes of the
Academy. Aenesidemus of Cnossos (floruit early first century BCE) appears
to have been a member of the Academy, but he left because Academic
philosophers had lost their sceptical edge. He called them "Stoics fighting
Stoics." Aenesidemus took Pyrrho as a figurehead, but we can't be sure what
he meant by this. In any case, Aenesidemus proposed some form of suspension
of judgment "which he detects in the thought of Pyrrho, but finds missing
in the thought of at least the Academics who were his rough contemporaries,
Philo and Antiochus" (5). Aenesidemus also renewed the idea that scepticism
leads to *ataraxia*, an idea that the Academics had no use for. We somehow
get from Aenesidemus to Sextus Empiricus (second or third century CE), and
after that scepticism dies out.
