# *Being Realistic About Reasons* T.M. Scanlon (Oxford, OUP, 2014)

## Lecture I "Introduction: Reasons Fundamentalism"

### 1.

Scanlon begins with "two important" differences between contemporary metaethics and metaethics of the 50s-70s. First, earlier metaethics focused "almost entirely on morality", that is "on the proper interpretation of claims about moral right and wrong, and other forms of moral evaluation" (1). Modern metaethics, by contrast devotes "a significant part of the debate" to "practical reasoning and normativity more generally: reasons for action, and, even more broadly, reasons for belief and other attitudes" (1). Second, earlier metaethics focused on "the question of motivation" (1). For morality, this meant wondering "how agents can be motivated by their moral judgments" (1). Although modern investigators still care about motivation, they are "also likely" to put their questions "in terms of *reasons*" (1, Scanlon's emphasis). So, for example, instead of (first?) considering how morality motivates someone, a modern investigator may ask "why a person has reason to do what will benefit him or her in the future, and to do what morality demands" (1).

In these lectures, Scanlon "will offer a qualified defense of a realistic cognitivism about reasons" (2). Scanlon explains the realism thus: "realistic...in recognizing that there may be limits to the range of cases in which such claims have determinate truth values" (2). Cognitive, he explains thus: "holding that claims about reasons for action can be correct or incorrect" (2). I understand what he means by "cognitivism," but I'm less sure about his realism. My best guess is that it has to do with his idea that the truth values of various claims need to be understood in terms of the "domain" of the items under consideration. (See Lecture 2 for more on this.)

The view Scanlon offers is fundamentalist insofar as "truths about reasons are not reducible to or identifiable with non-normative truths, such as truths about the natural world of physical objects, causes and effects, nor can they be explained in terms of notions of rationality or rational agency that are not themselves claims about reasons" (2). Scanlon also mentions a further sense of fundamentalism that he is "inclined to believe" but will not argue for in these lectures, namly that reasons are "the only fundamental elements of the normative domain" and "other normative notions such as *good* and *ought*" are "analyzable in terms of reasons" (2).

### 2.

Scanlon claims that his view about reasons has strong support from common sense. In support of this claim, he offers the following three examples (2):

1. For a person in control of a fast moving automobile, the fact that the car will injure and perhaps kill a pedestrian if the wheel is not turned is a reason to turn the wheel.
1. The fact that a person's child has died is a reason for that person to feel sad.
1. The fact that it would be enjoyable to listn to some very engaging music, moving one's body gently in time with it, is a reason to do this, or to continue doing it.

Scanlon views these cases as "obviously true," but at the same time he acknowledges that "the philosophical thesis that these are irreducibly normative truths may seem unsatisfactory" (3). He raises the following problems for his own view (3):

+ *Relational character*: Reasons are reasons *for* an agent. How is this relational character to be understood.
+ *Determinate truth values*: Are statements about reasons true or false, independent of our opinions about them? Does the idea that there are irreducibly normative truths of this kind have unacceptable metaphysical implications?
+ *Supervenience*: How are facts about reasons related to facts about what occurs, and what causes what, in the natural world? Normative facts are not entailed by such natural facts, but at least many normative facts depend on non-normative facts: they ary when non-normative facts vary and cannot vary as long as non-normative facts remain the same. This seems puzzling, and in need of explanation.
+ *Knowledge*: If there are irreducibly normative facts about reasons, how can we come to know such facts?
+ *Practical significance*: Judgments about reasons play a different role than other beliefs—such as beliefs about the natural world—in practical reasoning and in the explanation of action. How can they play this role if they are beliefs?
+ *Strength*: Reasons have varying strengths. The reason to turn the wheel of the car, for example, is a stronger reason than the reason to go on listening to enjoyable mustic: the fact that turning the wheel to avoid hitting the pedestrian would interfere with one's enjoyment of the music on the radio is not a sufficient reason not to turn it. So there is a question about what this strength amounts to.
+ *Optionality*: Some reasons seem to be "optional": they are merely considerations it makes sense to treat as reasons. Whereas other considerations are non-optional: they provide reasons that should be taken into account, whether or not they are conclusive. The pleasure of listening to music, in the example I just gave, is an optional reason—merely something it makes sense to count as a reason if one decides to do so. Whereas, at least in most circumstances, the fact that doing X would substantially reduce one's risk of an early death is a non-optional reason to do X, whether or not it is conclusive in a given case.

### 3.

Perhaps an account of reasons based on desires can answer all these questions. Such an account would claim that "X has a reason to do A just in case doing A would promote the fulfillment of some desire that X has" or "X has reason to do A if doing A would promote the fulfillment of a desire that X would have if X were fully aware of the relevant non-normative facts and thinking clearly" (3-4).

According to Scanlon a desire-based view like these can explain several of the problems facing any theory of reasons. The relational character makes sense if all reasons are reasons for someone who has some desire. Desires have varying strengths, and so would reasons therefore. A reason would be optional if it is a reason only for some people, the people who have the relevant desire; non-optional reasons would be ones that everyone (or everyone fully informed) has (or would have). We can know our desires in a straightforward way "at least sometimes" (4), as Scanlon says; our knowledge of reasons would piggyback on our knowledge of desires. The motivational power of reasons would come from the motivational power of desires, and that power seems axiomatic. A desire-based theory can also account for supervenience since what desires people have are "a function of natural facts" (4). When these natural facts change, their reasons change; when they stay the same, so do the relevant reasons.

On the other side, Scanlon suggests that there are also significant problems with desire-based theories of reason. In particular, there are "counterintuitive implications of desire theories about what reasons people have" (4). First, Scanlon asks "Does a person really have a reason to do what will fulfill any desire he or she has, no matter how foolish?" (4). Second, Scanlon worries "Does the reason the driver has to turn the car really depend on his or her having a desire that would be fulfilled by doing this?" Scanlon's first question suggests that desire-based theories may trivialize reasons or fail to justify what we take to be their internal meaningfulness. His second question starts from the other direction. If the first question asks us to consider desires we might have that correspond to no (true, deep) reasons, the second question leads us to worry about cases where we have a reason regardless of whether we have any desire. Both worries suggest that a desire-based theory lacks the necessary independence and objectivity to ground reasons.

Scanlon says that we might improve the desires account "by shifting from actual desires to informed desires" (4), but such a change would lead to its own problems. To begin with, we lose many of our earlier explanations. E.g., it is no longer so clear that the new theory can explain optionality, motivation, supervenience, or the relational character of reasons.

However, Scanlon sets all this aside for the moment in favor of "a deeper objection" (5). Scanlon argues that the appeal of desire-based theories is an illusion based on a failure to distinguish between two different ways of understanding desires. On the one hand, a desire-based theory makes "substantive normative claims about what reasons people have" (5). That is, the theory says that "people have reason to do what will promote the satisfaction of their desires" (5), where this is itself a *normative* claim, not a (merely) factual one. If the claim that desires support reasons is itself a normative claim, then the desire-based theory will no longer be able to answer questions about supervenience, determinate truth values, or knowledge, for example. Another, more striking way, that Scanlon puts the problem is this: "normative desire theories are not rivals to Reasons Fundamentalism but are quite compatible with it. Perhaps they even presuppose it" (5).

Scanlon offers desire-based theories a way out: they can ditch their normative claim and make a reductive claim instead. In such a case, "for *p* to be a reason for an agent to do *a* just is for the truth of *p* to help explain how doing *a* would promote the satisfaction of some desire that the agent has" (6). This alternative can still solve some of the problems that Scanlon set out earlier. For example, the reductive theory can account for the metaphysics and epistemology of reasons. However, it may not do very well in other areas. For example, Scanlon argues that it makes it unclear how or why reasons are "action guiding" in the way we intuitively take them to be, not merely as explanations but also as justifications for action. Nevertheless, Scanlon also admits that if a reductivist replies that they can preserve normativity insofar as "all normative is to be understood in terms of the idea of a reason" (6) and they can give an account of reasons (based on a person's desires), then Scanlon and this hypothetical desire-theorist are reach a standoff.

Ultimately, Scanlon says that a normative desire-based theory is unsatisfactory, but not for the reasons he's been discussing thus far. However, he leaves his larger proof of this for Lecture 4. At the moment, he simply leaves us with a reminder that a desire-based theory has two problems. First, they must address a dilemma: assume a normative claim about reasons for action (in which case, they rely on rather than oppose a reasons-based theory), or reduce all claims about reasons to facts about desire (in which case they may not leave room for real or significant normativity). In Scanlon's eyes, this leads to two further questions. First, can a desire theorist avoid the dilemma? Second, can a desire theorist account for normativity? But this Scanlon puts off until Lecture 4.
