# Philosophy before Socrates

## Thales and the earliest natural philosophers

For Shields, Thales is the first philosopher because he goes beyond the evidence both of the senses and of common sense. Thales attempts to understand everything, in some sense, as or through water. Whatever exactly it means for water to be an ἀρχή, neither the senses or common sense would lead you to say such a thing.

Shields compares Thales with modern scientists insofar as both make claims that are initially unbelievable and that require strong argument to accept. Thales makes "bold pronouncements about fundamental features of the universe which are not, and could not be, immediately accessible to sense experience or common sense" (1). Note that Shields is not making the familiar point here that much of contemporary science used to be a part of philosophy; he isn't concerned with subject matter. Instead Shields is concerned with method and with the relationship between philosophy or science on the one hand, and common sense and the evidence of our senses on the other. For Shields, our "initial impulses" come from what our senses and common sense tell us. If philosophy and science contradict these initial impulses, then people will require "compelling reasons" before they agree.

I wonder, however, if Shields is right about the dialectical situation of contemporary science. People do sometimes reject science, and often for very bad reasons—reasons which have nothing to do with "good reason" from a philosophical point of view. However, in many contexts people will follow science blindly, no matter how counter-intuitive its claims are, simply because it is science. That is, the discipline has far greater social status today than philosophy did in the time of Thales, or even in the time of Plato, Aristotle, or any of the Hellenistic schools. I don't think that ancient philosophy ever had the social status that contemporary science does.

We can understand what Shields says about Thales by thinking about *appearance* and *reality*. In a nutshell, we may normally assume that how the world *appears* is, by itself, good evidence for how the world *is*. However, both ancient philosophy and contemporary science challenge this assumption. They give us reason to think that how things *are* and how they *seem* can come apart, sometimes drastically so. It can be unsettling to open up such a gap, but it can also be an important intellectual step.

Shields alludes to the gap between appearance and reality, and in his mind it is *reason* that pushes us "beyond the immediate deliverances of the senses" and "beyond the realm of common conception" (1). In this way, we come to "believe that the world has inner workings uncovered only by research and reflection, and htat consequently the manifest image of the world needs to give way to a scientific image which corrects and overcomes our first, naïve conception of it" (1).
