# *Republic* Book 1

When Polemarchus first speaks with Socrates, he threatens him with force.
Socrates must either defeat superior numbers or yield to them.  Socrates
replies that there is a third optionâ€”he might persuade them instead of using
force.  But Polemarchus insists that they will not listen to argument. Plato
suggests something essential here: persuasion has limited power (327c-e).

According to Cephalus, money matters but not as much as people think.  He
denies that money alone makes old age easy to bear, but he admits that poverty
can make old age very difficult.  Cephalus insists that character makes more
difference than money does, but he does not deny that money matters
(329e-330a).

Socrates asks Cephalus, "What is the greatest advantage of having money?"
Cephalus replies that if you have money (and a good character), then you will
be more secure about your fate after death.  Why?  Because you will be less
likely to cheat people or to fail to give them what you owe them (330d-331b).

At this point, Socrates takes the opportunity to start a Socratic dialogue.
Socrates quickly shows Cephalus that we cannot treat "Give people what you owe
them and be truthful" as a universal rule of justice.  Socrates imagines
a case where a friend loans you a weapon.  You owe the friend that weapon, but
if the friend becomes insane, you should not give them the weapon back. In
    addition, you should not be entirely truthful to a friend who is out of
    their mind.  Thus, we have a problem (331c-d).

When Socrates challenges Cephalus in this way, his son Polemarchus replies.
Cephalus takes the opportunity to bow out; he needs to perform further
sacrifices (331c-d).  Thus, Cephalus never responds to Socrates, and readers
never see him support his views or reflect on them.  Scholars interpret
Cephalus in diverse ways perhaps because Plato removes him so quickly.  Some
see him as a good person but unthinkingly so and thus limited.  Others see him
as not even a truly good person because he does not know how truly to be good.

Polemarchus argues in favor of, roughly, the same position as his father.
Under pressure, however, Polemarchus shifts from "justice is giving people
what we owe them" to "justice is giving people what they deserve." Polemarchus
considers this (roughly?) the same as "help your friends and harm your
enemies."  Socrates replies that a good person should not *harm* anyone.
Instead, like a good doctor or good animal trainer, good people should
*improve* their enemies rather than harm them.  In addition, Socrates offers
several rapid arguments that quibble with the exact wording of Polemarchus's
definition.  In the end, Socrates convinces Polemarchus that they need a new
definition of justice (331d-336b).

Before Socrates and Polemarchus can continue, Thrasymachus interrupts.  He
objects to the style and the conclusions of the previous discussions.
Thrasymachus mocks Socrates and Polemarchus for yielding to each other
obsequiously, and he argues that justice is "what is good for the stronger"
(336c-338c).

Socrates and Thrasymachus argue, and Socrates eventually wears Thrasymachus
down.  That is, Thrasymachus grudgingly yields, but he also makes clear that
he thinks Socrates cheats (by lying? by using bad arguments?).  By the end of
Book 1, Thrasymachus agrees (i) that justice is better (and wiser) than
injustice and (ii) that the just person has a better and happier life than the
unjust person.  As we will see, Plato wants readers to be dissatisfied with
the conclusion of Book 1.
