# *Republic* Book 9

Socrates begins Book 9 right where he ended Book 8, namely "the tyrannical man
himself," but Socrates interrupts himself before he takes up this leftover
topic (571a).  Socrates tells Adeimantus that he is not satisfied with their
earlier analysis of desires, and he proposes that they fix that analysis
before they discuss the tyrant (558d-559d).

According to Socrates, some unnecessary desires are "violent or lawless"
(571b).  All people are born with such desires, but some people eliminate them
(completely or almost completely), and in other people such desires become
stronger and more numerous.

To describe these desires, Socrates refers to dreams.  When we are sleeping,
he says, the rational part of us can be weaker, and these awful desires emerge
most clearly.  In their dreams, people imagine terrible and wild things.
Socrates specifically mentions sex with a mother as a kind of dream.  Socrates
says that the good person will use reason to calm down their spirited and
desiring soul before sleep.  That way, they will not have dreams fed by
violent or foul thoughts (571c-572b).

According to Socrates, the tyrant emerges from a democracy when their baser
desires grow, multiply, and weaken reasonable desires and rational
self-control.  Socrates compares the tyrant to Eros, to drunken people, and to
insane people.  The common thread here is a lack of control and self-control,
a wildness that is difficult to tame or guide (572b-573c).

After Socrates has described the development, nature, and life of the tyrant,
he begins to compare lives.  Or rather he simply asserts that the differences
between these lives are obvious.  First, he says (without argument) that the
people in each case resemble the city.  Second, he says (without argument)
that the tyrant is the worst city and the imagined city is the best city.  In
addition, he and Glaucon agree (without argument) that the city with a tyrant
is the least happy and the imagined city is the most happy.  They go from best
to worst, and happiest to least happy, in the order that Socrates narrates
them (573c-577b).

Socrates adds that the tyrant and the city ruled by a tyrant are the most
enslaved of all the cities and people.  Regardless of what the tyrant himself
may say or think, the tyrant is enslaved to desires and not free to do what he
wants.  Note, however, that "what he wants" is (possibly?) understood in
a tendentious way.  We can't learn what he wants by asking him.  To explain
this to students, I'll need to introduce negative and positive freedom.

After an elaboration of just how bad the tyrant and his life are, Socrates
offers a second proof of their ordering of lives.  He reminds us that the city
and people's souls are divided into three classes.  Each class or parts of the
soul has its own type of pleasure, desire, and rule.  The three parts are the
rational part, the spirited part, and the desiring part.  The desiring part
aims, most of all, at money and profit (in order to feed its other desires?).
The spirited part aims (most of all) at power, victory, and reputation.  That
is, the spirited part cares most about winning and honor.  The rational part
cares most of all about learning, wisdom, and truth.  Since these three types
take pleasure in different things, we cannot simply ask, "Which life is the
most pleasant?"  We do not have a uniform measure of pleasure any longer.  The
word is equivocal, it seems.  In the face of this, Glaucon does not know how
to determine which life is most pleasant (580d-582a).

Socrates says that we should judge by means of "experience, reflection, and
reasoning" (ἐμπειρία, φρόνησις, λόγος).  This may sound like Socrates is
cheating, but he explains that only the one who has tried all three types of
pleasure can choose between them.  I will grant that the philosopher has
experienced honor and victory, but in what sense has the philosopher tried the
pleasures of desire?  In any case, using this method, Socrates and Glaucon
again rank the lives from best to worst: rational pleasures are best, then
spirited, and then pleasures based on desires (582a-583a).

Finally, Socrates offers a third argument for the same conclusion.  Socrates
says that he's heard from an expert that only wise people have true and pure
pleasures; other people have pleasures that are like "shadow painting" (583b).
(Scholars don't know whether Plato has in mind some specific expert or whether
this is just something he has Socrates say for other reasons.)

Glaucon doesn't understand what this means, and Socrates explains by question
and answer.  First, Socrates gets Glaucon to agree that pleasure and pain are
opposites, and that there is a third, intermediate state between them.  When
people have been in great pain or distress, they sometimes say that mere
painlessness is amazing and a pleasure.  However, in the other direction, if
a person has been experiencing great pleasure, then they may consider mere
lack of pleasure as a pain.  Thus, the intermediate state can be looked at
positively or negatively; it all depends on the previous condition and
background of the person judging, apparently.  Using some of his usual
arguments, Socrates claims that the intermediate state only *seems* pleasant
or painful, but in fact these appearances are deceptive and unreal.  Socrates
concludes that most people are like someone who travels from bottom to middle
and then falsely thinks that the middle is the top.  This imagined person does
not have experience of the true range of things, and what they consider the
greatest height is actually only a middle height.  Socrates argues that
opinion, knowledge, and understand have "more being" and thus (!?) are "more
pleasant" than things like food and drink.  Socrates makes parallel arguments
for the pleasures of the spirited part in comparison with the pleasures of the
rational part.  Thus, we arrive at the same order again: the most pleasant
life is the rational life, then the spirited life, then the life of desire
(583b-587b).

Socrates rounds out this argument with some math.  I think that the math is
a joke, but I'm not sure.  In any case, he concludes that the philosopher's
life is 729 times better than the tyrant's life (587b-588a).

Finally, Socrates is ready to answer their original question: if someone is
completely unjust but has a reputation for justice, is injustice profitable
for them?  Socrates answers this with a remarkable image.  First, we imagine
three creatures: a multi-headed one, with some heads gentle and some heads
fierce and wild; a lion; and a human (i.e., the desiring, spirited, and
rational parts of the soul).  Then we imagine those three creatures joined
into one unit (i.e., a soul) and placed into a human being.  In an unjust
person, the human part of the soul is weak and small, the desiring part grows
huge, and the spirited part grows and is largely uncontrolled.  In such
a person, the desiring and spirited parts fight with one another constantly,
and the human part is dragged around by those two parts.  In a just person,
the rational part is strong and large.  The rational part controls and uses
the spirited part as an ally against the desiring part, and the desiring part
is cultivated so that the fierce heads grow weak and the gentle heads grow
strong.  Socrates and Glaucon agree that by many measures the just person is
better off than the unjust person if we apply this analogy to both
(588a-592b).
