# *Republic* Book 2

At the start of Book 2, Glaucon tells Socrates that the arguments defending
justice in Book 1 only *seemed* to convince the listeners.  Socrates must give
better arguments if he wishes actually to convince people.  Socrates says that
he wants to do better, and Glaucon and Socrates agree to continue the argument
(357a-b).

Glaucon divides goods into three categories, and he asks Socrates which
category justice belongs to.  According to Glaucon, (i) we choose some goods
only for themselves (e.g., enjoyment and harmless pleasures with no further
consequences), (ii) we choose other goods both for themselves and for their
consequences (e.g., thinking, seeing, being healthy), and (iii) we choose some
things only for their consequences (e.g., we work for pay and we undergo
medical treatment in order to become healthy).  Socrates replies that justice
is a type (ii) good: we choose it for itself and for its consequences
(357b-358a).

Glaucon replies that most people think otherwise, and he challenges Socrates
to make a convincing case for his point of view.  According to Glaucon, most
people consider justice a type (iii) good: they choose justice only for its
consequences.  Glaucon proposes to pick up and improve Thrasymachus's argument
in order that Socrates can respond to it again—but better.  In particular,
Glaucon tells Socrates that he will do three things: (i) he will explain what
most people think justice is, (ii) he will show that most people only choose
justice as a type (ii) good, that is unwillingly, and (iii) he will argue that
most people are reasonable to behave the way that they do since they believe
that an unjust person has a better life than a just person.  Socrates agrees
to Glaucon's plan (358b-358e).

Glaucon explains that people only value justice as a second-best choice.  He
says that most people think that is it naturally good to do wrong and
naturally bad to be wronged.  (What exactly does he mean here? I am not sure.)
However, he continues, most people also think that being wronged outweighs
doing wrong.  That is, I suppose, people want to avoid other people wronging
them more than they want to wrong other people.  Thus, people create laws and
agreements in order to protect themselves from the harm other people may do
them.  Everyone's first choice is to do wrong and not get caught, and
everyone's last choice is to be wronged and not be able to retaliate (or
protect oneself?).  Thus, people settle for justice as a "half-way between
these two extremes" (358c-359b).

Glaucon supports these strong claims with a thought experiment, the ring of
Gyges.  Gyges was a shepherd from Lydia, and he discovered a magical ring.
The ring made him invisible if he turned it towards his palm while wearing it.
Using the ring, Gyges sleeps with the queen and, with her help, kills the king
and takes over as king.  Glaucon says that this story shows two things: (i) in
this scenario, everyone would choose injustice rather than justice, and (ii)
in this scenario, everyone would be right to choose injustice rather than
injustice (359c-360d).

Finally, in order to think about the choice of lives, Glaucon depicts what he
considers "the completely just [person]" and "the completely injust [person]."
He insists that we imagine the unjust person to be maximally competent and an
excellent liar.  As a result, everyone thinks that the unjust person is just.
Thus, our completely unjust person has all the benefits of an unjust life, but
they suffer none of the normal punishments of that life.  They don't go to
jail, people don't hate them, nobody shames or scorns them in public, and so
on.  By contrast, the just person must suffer all the (unfair) consequences of
bad luck and poor treatment.  Even though they are good, they are persecuted,
robbed of their just rewards, tried, convicted, and killed in a brutal manner.
All the while, the unjust person lives an (apparently) successful and happy
life.  They can marry who they choose, they make money, their family and
business thrives, and they sacrifice regularly (360e-361c).

I should note that I think Glaucon may be cheating here, but Plato clearly
does not care.  At least, he does not yet care.  For the moment, he allows
Glaucon to set the problem up in this way, as if *this* is the right way to
examine just and unjust lives.

At this point, Socrates thinks that he can begin to make his case, but
Glaucon's brother Adeimantus interrupts.  Adeimantus says that Socrates must
explain even more than Glaucon demanded.  Glaucon demanded that Socrates
explain away the negative things people say about justice and the positive
things that they say about injustice.  Adeimantus now demands that Socrates
also explain why people praise justice and criticize injustice in the ways
that they do.  According to Adeimantus, when people praise justice and
criticize injustice, they demonstrate that they don't care about justice and
injustice themselves.  Instead, people reveal that they actually care about
the appearance of justice or injustice because the appearance one way or the
other leads to benefits or harms.  Furthermore, Adeimantus requires Socrates
to address why people say that (in themselves?) justice is hard and unpleasant
while injustice is easy and pleasant.  People also say that the gods often
harm just people and benefit unjust people.  Finally, Adeimantus reminds
Socrates that in popular understanding, the gods can be bribed to ignore any
wrongdoing by the unjust.  If these people are right, then the best life would
be one where a person is cleverly unjust (in order to evade human punishment)
and bribes the gods (in order to evade divine punishment).  Socrates must show
that all of these popular beliefs are wrong  (361d-367d).

Socrates agrees to try to defend justice, but worries that he is not up to the
task.  As he says, he thought his previous arguments did the job, but Glaucon
and Adeimantus have raised further criticisms.  Although Socrates is not
convinced that he will succeed this time, he feels required to defend justice
when he hears it attacked.  He proposes a method that he hopes will help the
investigation.  Instead of looking at justice and injustice in individual
people, he proposes to look at justice and injustice in cities.  He claims
that justice and injustice in a city is a larger version of justice and
injustice in people.  This larger vision will make the nature of justice and
injustice easier to see even if we suffer something like poor eyesight.
Adeimantus agrees, and they begin (367e-368b).

Socrates initially paints a flattering picture of a minimal city.  In such
a city, everyone focuses on what they are best at, and all the citizens pursue
rather limited desires.  They do not produce or seek luxuries of any kind.
Their food, homes, clothing, and entertainment are all simple to the point of
being unrealistic.  Nevertheless, Socrates admires and praises such a life:
"Drinking wine after their meals, garlands on their heads, and singing the
praises of the gods, they will live quite happily with one another.  They will
have no more children than they can afford, and they will avoid poverty and
war" (368b-371c)

Glaucon objects that this first city is too minimal: he calls it a "city of
pigs."  I am not sure exactly what insult we should hear in the word *pigs*.
Griffith says "Pigs were considered slow and stupid (compare 535e) as well as
dirty and greedy—the emblem of all that was uncouth" (55, note 24).
Obviously, Glaucon can't have greed in mind here.  And I don't see much point
in calling the first city slow or stupid.  *Uncouth* seems like a more
relevant insult, but perhaps too specific?  I think Glaucon objects to the
lack of culture and civilization in the lives of these people.  They have no
refinement in food or way of life for Glaucon.  They take simple to the point
of simplistic.

For the rest of Book 2, Socrates argues that the ideal city should train its
citizens well and that good education requires censorship.  The good city must
not allow children to grow up with false ideas about the gods.  In particular,
the gods do not do evil things to each other or to humans.  Nor do the gods
change form or deceive people about their appearance or who they are.  Stories
must not represent the gods as lying (376d-383c).
