# *Republic* Book 3

Socrates continues to discuss education and censorship.  He argues that the
guardians of their city must be brave, and therefore poets and writers may not
say scary things about the underworld.  (Socrates also says that these views
are false, but he focuses on the consequences of telling people these views
rather than on whether they are true or false.)  In addition, Socrates
suggests some old-fashioned toxic masculinity: "we shall get rid of weeping
and wailing by famous men" (387d).  As an argument, Socrates says that the
people he imagines will be most capable and thus least in need of others.
Thus, these people will be less likely to cry or grieve when they lose "a son,
or a brother, or some money, or anything like that" (387e).

Since truth is so important, lying is bad for the most part.  Socrates allows
for instrumental reasons to lie, but only leaders of the city should be
allowed to lie.  In particular, ordinary citizens must never lie to their
leaders.  Socrates compares such lies to a patient lying to a doctor about
their condition or people lying to the captain of a ship about essential
information.

Socrates says that citizens must be obedient to their leaders, and in
particular citizens may not criticize or speak rudely to their leaders.  Since
self-control is hugely important, writers should also avoid too much praise of
food, drink, and sex.

Throughout his discussion of literature and education, Socrates appears to
assume that all the characters in literature are (always and only?) positive
role models.  We must remove any bad example from the actions of Achilles,
Theseus, and similar people in order to protect citizens from harmful examples
(391a-391e).

Socrates explains to Adeimantus that they cannot make rules yet about how
writers should talk about people.  If they set rules for how writers can talk
about justice and injustice, they will beg the question.  Thus, they will have
to wait (392a-c).

Next, Socrates considers rules for how writers tell stories.  Adeimantus does
not understand what Socrates has in mind.  This suggests to me that Plato
knows he is inventing something new here.  He introduces a very early version
of narratology.  Socrates divides narrative into simple, imitative, and
a combination of simple and imitative.  In simple narrative, the poet tells us
(in their own voice) what characters do.  In imitative narrative, the poet
pretends to be a character.  To go by the early examples, Plato seems to think
of imitative narrative as speeches (only?).  In mixed narrative, a poet goes
back and forth between simple and imitative styles.  According to Socrates and
Adeimantus, simple narrative appears in lyric, (purely) imitative narrative
appears in drama, and epic employs mixed narrative (392c-394c).

Socrates argues that imitation is bad because it leads people to violate the
rule that people should only do the one thing that they are best at.  However,
the subsequent argument appears to waffle between two claims: (i) imitation
itself is bad, and the citizens of the ideal city should not (ever?) imitate
or (ii) imitation of bad people and examples is bad.  Thus, Socrates quickly
moves back to banning things based *on content*, which seems more relevant to
(ii) than to (i) above.  Ultimately, Socrates allows imitation of good people
and examples, but only minimal imitation of bad people and examples.

Socrates turns to modes next.  He bans modes that are appropriate to dirges,
laments, or drinking songs.  He allows only martial and ennobling modes, and
in the end they select the Dorian and Phrygian modes for their city.  (He does
a similar "purging" of rhythm next, but I cannot even.)

After a very brief mention of other arts (painting and sculpture), Socrates
and Glaucon agree that they should pass laws restricting sexual behavior too.
They focus on the Athenian norm of older men and younger men.  They bar these
couples from having sex, but the older man may "kiss his boyfriend...if the
boy says 'yes'" (403b).  There's a lot to say here, but Socrates seems to care
most of all about how people end up rather than their consent or autonomy.

Towards the end of Book 3, Socrates argues that they must tell a huge lie to
their citizens.  They must tell their citizens that they are all born of the
earth, which they must protect, and that they have different, natural metallic
natures.  Since they are all related a child of any parent can be born with
any metal.  Children of silver and gold become guardians and auxiliaries.
Children of other metals do other jobs.  The guardians and auxiliaries must
live at public expense, and they must be barred from owning (or using) gold
and silver.  Only in this way, can they avoid becoming greedy and diverted
into unnecessary and unhelpful pursuits (414b-417b).
