# *Republic* Book 4

At the start of Book 4, Adeimantus complains that Socrates is giving the
guardians an undesirable life.  They do an enormous amount of work, but other
people enjoy the benefits and good things in life.  The guardians themselves,
however, do not enjoy the life that they create for others.  Socrates replies
that this may be fine.  His goal so far has been to create a city that is
happy.  In doing so, he does not aim to make any particular part of the city
especially happy.  It may be that Socrates is correct and that the city as
a whole will be most happy this way.  He may be wrong too, but we need to
finish depicting the city before we can decide (419a-420c).

Socrates continues by saying that the guardians must avoid poverty or wealth
among the craftspeople in the city.  If any group is too rich or too poor,
they will not work properly.  Thus, the guardians should avoid either extreme
(420d-422a).

Adeimantus asks how their city would fare in war with other cities, and
Socrates replies that they will win for several reasons.  First, other cities
are not united.  As Socrates puts it, no other city is a single, unified city.
Instead, the others are all two cities: each one is a city of poor people and
a city of wealthy people.  Socrates argues that their city can play these
groups against one another to the advantage of the ideal city.  In addition,
the other cities do not contain such vigorous, active citizens.  The guardians
will be exceedingly well trained and capable soldiers (422a-423b).

Socrates argues that there is a natural limit on the size of their city.  The
city can continue to grow up to the point that growth would make the city less
united in character.  Then the city must stop growing (423b-423d).

According to Socrates, education is the single most important requirement of
their city.  If the education for the guardians is excellent, then the
guardians themselves will figure out everything that they must do.  In
addition, excellent education produces a "virtuous circle" in a city, as each
generation grows up to train more good guardians (423e-424c).

As a side point, Socrates argues that they do not need to pass laws about
certain practices even though those practices are very important.  Socrates
expects well-educated children to display deference in various ways (standing
for elders, being silent in the presence of elders) and also to follow good
practices in terms of appearance (hair, clothes, etc.).  However, he says that
they should not pass laws for such things.  Instead, if the guardians do their
jobs right in terms of education, then children will do all of these things
automatically (425a-c).

Adeimantus makes a similar argument about contract law, and Socrates agrees.
Socrates adds that people who constantly pass laws, searching for just the
right set of laws, are like people who constantly adjust their medical plans
in search of health.  In both cases, these people avoid an important truth:
they have to change something more basic in order to achieve what they want
(health or good citizens) (425c-426e).  (Note to self: consider Foucault's
*Discipline and Punish* here?)

The final set of laws concern religion.  In this case, Socrates argues that
they should be entirely traditional.  They should follow the practices set
down by the oracle of Apollo at Delphi (427b-427d).

Now that the city is fully described, Socrates says that they must look for
the wisdom, courage, self-discipline, and justice within the city.  When they
find those virtues, they will be able to explain how and why the city is just
(427e).  They find wisdom in the chief guardians, and Socrates emphasizes that
a very small part of the entire city properly possesses wisdom.  They find
courage in the auxiliary guardians.  They find self-discipline in the order
and control that the guardians exert over the rest of the city.  In this way,
we can understand why people say that self-discipline means being "stronger
than oneself."  A small part of the whole (here, the guardians) are in control
of a far larger part of the whole (here, the rest of the citizens).  They find
wisdom and courage in specific parts of the city, but they find
self-discipline in the harmonious arrangement that exists between parts of the
city.  Finally, Socrates argues that justice is the rule that each person
should do their own job within the city.  This principle preserves all the
rest of the good organization and good elements within the city (427e-435d).

An important note: at 433d, Socrates says that their city will contain slaves.
I am not sure how much to make of this, but when he discusses the various
people in the city, he says, "child and woman, slave and free man, in skilled
craftsman, ruler and ruled."  Perhaps the tendency to polar expressions gets
the better of Socrates here?  I cannot decide.  (See, e.g., "Does Slavery
Exist in Plato's Republic?" by Gregory Vlastos, Classical Philology, Volume
63, Number 4, October 1968 and "Slavery in Plato's Republic" by Brian Calvert,
Classical Quarterly, Volume 37, Number ii, 1987.)

Socrates hopes to confirm his account of justice (and the other virtues) in
the ideal city by looking at justice (and the other virtues) in individual
people.  Socrates then does some ethic racism.  He argues that we can see each
of the three types of citizen in people of different regions.  We see the
spirited part in Thrace and Scythia; we see the philosopher type in Greece (or
specifically Athens?); we see the commercial type in Phoenicia or Egypt
(435e-436a).

Thus far, however, Socrates thinks that he has only shown that *people* have
these types.  He still must show that these types exist within one or more
parts of individual people.  Socrates argues that one thing cannot do two
opposed actions or be in two opposed states at the same time and in relation
to the same object.  Socrates gives examples of a person at rest but moving
their head and a top spinning but not moving in its exact center.  However, he
insists that there are multiple parts here to explain the conflict.  Using the
example of a thirsty person who refuses to drink, Socrates establishes that
there are at least two parts of the soul.  One part desires (thirsts) and the
other part reasons (and thus orders the person to wait or not to drink *this
dirty water* or whatever).  In order to justify a third element, Socrates uses
the story of Leontius.  Leontius both wanted and did not want to look at
corpses.  His behavior suggests a conflict between desire and *anger* rather
than (only) a conflict between desire and knowledge.  Thus, we must posit
a third part of the soul, distinct from knowledge or desire, for anger and
other spirited emotions.  Socrates and Glaucon also provide arguments to show
that spirit is closer to the rational part of the soul than to the desiring
part, but nevertheless spirit is distinct from the rational part.  I'll omit
those for now (436c-441d).
far, however, Socrates only thinks that 
