# *Republic* Book 10

At the start of Book 10, Socrates returns to poetry.  Socrates congratulates
himself for excluding imitative poetry from their city.  Now that they have
a better idea of how the soul works, he supports this exclusion more than
ever.  Glaucon asks why, and Socrates explains how imitative poetry is bad for
listeners who do not "have the antidote, the knowledge of what it really is"
(595b).

Socrates returns to the forms in order to explain his dislike for imitation.
For each thing, e.g., tables and chairs, there is a single form.  Craftspeople
create things by looking towards the form of that thing.  Painters, however,
make everything by looking towards objects here on earth.  Imitators,
therefore, make things that are "two removes from nature" (597e).  Even worse,
painters (and other such imitators) seek to represent "what appears, as it
appears" rather than "what is, as it is" (598b).  Painters and poets can only
"create everything" in the sense that they can create appearances that may be
(and often are?) quite far from reality (596a-598d).

Socrates beats up on Homer as follows.  If Homer really knew about the things
he puts into his poems, he would actually engage with those things rather than
with telling stories about them.  We have no reason to believe that Homer knew
medicine well, but even in the case of war, we can ask whether Homer won any
battles.  Since he did not, and he did not contribute (as far as we know) to
any other art, we can conclude that Homer was not truly wise.  Another proof
is that there is no school of Homer as there is for Pythagoras and other wise
people.  Again, this suggests that Homer had no real knowledge except how to
create pleasing images that fool only people who also lack knowledge
(598d-601b).

Socrates adds users as a third group; there are makers, imitator, and users.
Imitators have the least knowledge of the thing, and users have the greatest
knowledge.  Users can and should direct makers on the finer points of the
things that they respectively use and make.  The user knows what is good and
bad for each object; the maker has correct opinion, given to them by the user,
and the imitator has neither knowledge nor correct opinion (601b-602b).

This brings Socrates back to poets.  Poets are a kind of imitators, and
imitators (as Socrates has just shown) have no knowledge about the things they
imitate.  These imitators and imitations fool only those who also lack
knowledge.  Since imitators rely on appearances to please and be convincing,
they (necessarily) appeal to the non-rational parts of the soul.  The rational
part cares about truth and knowledge; the other parts care about appearances
and pleasure.  Socrates extends this line of thought with a short discussion
of grief.  A good person will feel and express some grief, but in a very
limited and controlled manner.  Again, the best part of the soul advises
self-control and very minimal grief.  Poets, however, imitate and appeal to
people who feel and express emotions much more fully and freely.  Thus, the
best city should exclude or limit the role of imitation and imitative arts
inside it (602b-605b).

Finally, Socrates argues that good people will also gain the greatest reward
of all after death.  Socrates asserts confidently that our souls are immortal.
Glaucon is unsure whether this is true, and Socrates says that he can easily
convince him.  First, Socrates says that what is good preserves and what is
bad destroys.  Next, he claims that each thing has its own particular good and
bad.  E.g., blight is bad for wheat, and rot is bad for wood.  In every case,
the characteristic evil of a thing is what destroys it.  However, if we
discover something that has an evil that does not destroy it, then (says
Socrates) nothing can destroy that thing.  The soul is in exactly this
situation.  Injustice, cowardice, ignorance, and lack of discipline make the
soul bad, but they do not actually destroy it.  Therefore, nothing destroys
the soul (608d-611a).

Next Socrates asks Glaucon if they can do away with the assumptions that the
just person appeared unjust and the unjust person appeared just.  Now that
they have proven that justice pays and injustice harms, they can do away with
this fiction.  Once they let this stipulation go, Socrates can insist that
whatever happens to the just person must be for the best since the gods would
not allow it otherwise.  Thus, if the just person suffers apparent evils, it
will turn out well either in this lifetime or in the afterlife (612c-613b).

Socrates argues briefly that just people do better than unjust people in terms
of human rewards too.  He compares unjust people to runners who start fast but
lose races; just people may start slow, but in the end, they win rewards from
people (613b-614a).

Socrates now introduces the story of Er.  (I suspect that Plato makes Er
foreign on purpose, but I am not sure exactly why.)  Er was killed in battle,
but his body did not decompose, and twelve days after he died, he came back to
life when he was lying on a funeral pyre.  When he came back to life, he told
everyone about what he saw in the afterlife.  The dead gather to be judged in
a place that has two entrances to the underworld and two entrances to the
upper world.  If you were good, your good history is written on your front, and
you go up via one entrance.  If you were bad, your bad history if written on
your back, and you go down via one entrance.  The other up and down entrance
are for souls to come down or up to earth again for reincarnation.  In
general, people go a thousand years below or above in order to receive
punishments or rewards for how they behave in their lives. But some people are
so bad that they can never come up again (614b-616c).

The souls that emerge from up and down travel to where they will go back to
mortal life together.  When they get there, they choose what sort of life they
want next.  They get to choose among human and animal lives.  Many Homeric
heroes are present, and Odysseus has the last lot.  He remembered his
difficult life, and so he slowly and carefully looked for a simple life
without too much ambition.  He found it finally—everyone else had left it—and
he was delighted.  After this, the souls are joined to their fates, and they
travel to the place where they will go back up to life.  The book ends with
Socrates saying that we should make sure to hold onto these lessons so that we
enjoy good lives and good afterlives (617d-621d).
