# *Republic* Book 8

Socrates begins Book 8 by restating where they are and where they were when
they digressed to reach this point.  They have now outlined everything
essential about their good city.  The key points concern how women, children,
and education are handled, that philosophers will be rulers, and that the
auxiliary guardians will live together without private property at the expense
of the city (543a-c).  Glaucon agrees, and he says that they digressed just as
Socrates was about to explain the four most important non-ideal cities.
Socrates agrees, and he picks up just where they left off earlier (543d-544b).

First, Socrates names the four types.  First, there is the Cretan or Spartan
arrangement.  (Later, he will call this timocracy or timarchy.)  Next, there
are oligarchies.  After that, comes democracy.  Last of all is tyranny.
According to Socrates there is a person for each of the five types of rule.
They have been describing aristocracy, and they have finished that and the
description of the person who corresponds to that form of rule.  Now they will
discuss the other four (544c-545b).

Socrates believes that the regimes can change in very limited ways.  First of
all, he appears to believe that they must change in a specific order:
aristocracy to timarchy, timarchy to oligarchy, oligarchy to democracy, and
democracy to tyranny.  Second, he says that regimes change only when the
ruling individual or group changes.  That is, Socrates does not acknowledge
regime change that begins from below (545b-546a).

Socrates has the Muses explain how aristocracy becomes timarchy.  In
a nutshell, the guardians make mistakes in their breeding program and less
than ideal people come to power.  When that happens, the rulers don't pay
enough attention to education.  Because education worsens, the next wave of
rulers are even worse off than the less than the first less than ideal group.
Eventually, the city becomes split between rulers and commercial interests.
They fight and as a compromise, they sell land and property to be owned
privately, and they enslave the lowest class of people.  This creates
a Spartan-like state of timarchy.  Socrates follows this with a sketch of how
the corresponding person comes to be.  Briefly, the son of an aristocratic man
is tempted towards a worse path by the wrongheaded ideas of his mother, his
family's slaves, and the people around him.  They lead such a person away from
reason and towards control by his spirited part; that part of him is driven
more by competition and ambition (for power and money) (546a-550b).

Next Socrates considers oligarchy and the oligarchical man.  In a nutshell,
money leads timocracy towards oligarchy.  Since people have private property
now, they "start by inventing extravagances for themselves, and then they bend
the laws in that direction" (550c).  The more they care about money, the less
they care about virtue.  This leads them to care less about competition and
spirited pursuits (e.g., war and competition for virtue).  They love money
more and more.  Eventually, they create an oligarchy by law: they require
property of a certain level to be in the government.  Such a city has many
flaws.  First, you may ignore worthy people who are poor.  Second, such a city
is not united: it is a city of poor people and a city of wealthy people, but
they are not joined in interests or character.  Once again, the corresponding
person is the son of a timocratic man.  This son sees his father lose all his
money and status, and he turns from the spirited towards the avaricious part
of his soul.  Thus, we get oligarchical people.  Socrates explains that they
are like their city: two people inside, as better and worse desires compete
within them (550c-555a).

Democracy comes from oligarchy in the following way.  First, many of the
wealthy class become poor through bad luck or mismanagement.  Second, the poor
are often driven to extreme methods by their lack of basic requirements.
Eventually, the rich and poor begin to fight—this can happen in many ways—at
which point, the city becomes a democracy if the poor win.  Everyone now has
an equal share in office, and many offices are now chosen by lot rather than
by vote.  On the one hand, the great freedom in such a city seems very
positive.  On the other hand, these people lack discipline and knowledge of
what they should actually aim at.  Thus, their life is free but not truly
good.  Again, it's the son of a oligarch who becomes democratic when his
necessary and unnecessary desires battle, and the unnecessary ones gain too
much power and freedom (555b-562a).

Next, and last, Socrates explains how tyranny comes from democracy and the
tyrant comes to be.  In a democracy, people value freedom most of all.  This
leads to tyranny because "excess in one direction generally tends to produce
a violent reaction in the opposite direction."  In this case, too much
freedom leads to too much slavery.  (This is, um, a theory.  Yup.)  How does
this happen?  Something, something, something (mostly about bees, drones, and
honey), and then the people set up a champion for their interests.  Eventually
this champion turns on the people they champion and becomes a tyrant.  The
book ends before Socrates explains how the tyrant comes to be (562a-569c).
