# *Republic* Book 6

Socrates begins Book 6 by asking who should be the guardians of the city they
are imagining, the philosophers or those who are not philosophers?  He
compares the non-philosophers to people who are visually blind, insofar as the
non-philosophers cannot see and keep their eye on unchanging knowledge.
Glaucon agrees that the philosophers sound better, but he insists that
Socrates must demonstrate that philosophers also have practical experience
(484a-485a).

However, in what follows, Socrates does not discuss practical experience
directly.  Instead, Socrates argues that a genuine lover of truth
(philosopher) will necessarily also have all the basic virtues.  They will be
disciplined because they will lack desire for things that don't matter.  They
will be brave because they have no reason to fear death or anything else.  And
so on.  At this point, Adeimantus interrupts.  He asks Socrates to explain why
so many philosophers appear useless or actively bad if what Socrates has
already said is correct (485a-487d).

In answer to this challenge, Socrates gives an analogy to a ship.  The ship's
owner does not know how to sail, and neither do the crew.  The crew, however,
fight over the right to control the ship.  But if people study the stars and
other things, the crew rejects their knowledge as useless, and sometimes they
even kill those people.  Instead, the crew uses force and persuasion to get
control of the ship.  Apparently, this analogy explains things?  I find it
very unconvincing (and unclear), but both Socrates and Adeimantus find it
helpful (487e-488d).

Socrates argues that (natural) philosophers end up bad (or not properly
philosophical) when they have the bad luck to be born in places that raise
them badly.  He seems both to blame the sophists and to argue that sophists
have no power.  Socrates imagines an Alcibiades-like figure.  This person is
naturally philosophical, good looking, and wealthy.  But because they are
raised badly, they turns all their natural gifts towards bad ends.  Or, if the
person does try to pursue philosophy, all the popular forces around them will
fight to prevent this outcome.  Thus, it is (nearly?) impossible for even
a natural philosopher to come out well in a bad city (490c-495b).

Since the true (natural) philosophers rarely (never?) pursue philosophy,
unworthy people rush in to fill the gap.  For some reason (not stated),
philosophy still has a good reputation.  Thus, people want to be philosophers,
but for the wrong reasons.  They are the ones who bring such shame to
philosophy, but only because they do it badly and without truly understanding
what philosophy is and what it demands of us.  The lucky few—people who should
do philosophy and who stick with it—are so rare and so outnumbered that they
mostly keep quiet and out of the way.  Socrates offers an implicit defense
here of his own political quietism (495c-496e).

Socrates continues by saying, in answer to a question by Adeimantus, that no
existing political system "is worthy of philosophy" (497b).  As a result,
philosophers have never been able to fully thrive.  They cannot grow fully in
soils that are not fully supportive of them.  Adeimantus guesses that the
ideal city would be the right soil, and Socrates agrees—sort of.  However,
Socrates insists that the education given to philosophers must be delayed.
They should not engage in the most challenging part of philosophy until they
are older (after "they are released from politics and military service"
(498c).  And Socrates repeats his claim that in the best case, philosophers
must become rulers or rulers must become philosophers.  Anything else will be
less than ideal (499b).

Socrates draws several strands of his argument together.  He says that they
have shown (i) that the arrangement of their imagined city is the best
possible, (ii) that the arrangement of their imagined city is possible, (iii)
that it is possible for a philosopher to come to be, (iv) that it is possible
for a philosopher to become a ruler (or for a ruler to become a philosopher),
(v) that it is very difficult for the arrangement of their imagined city to be
realized.  Thus, their imagined city is difficult but possible, and it is the
best possible option (502a-c).

Socrates explains that philosophers will be rare.  A philosopher must be both
calm and orderly, but also intelligent and quick to learn.  However, these
qualities are rarely all found together in one person (503b-503d).

Socrates insists that the guardians of the city must pursue the ultimate
study.  They must learn in detail about the form of the good, "that which just
things and anything else must make use of if they are to be useful and
beneficial" (505a).  Socrates rejects definitions of *the good* as *pleasure*
or *knowledge of the good*.  He claims that people will accept the appearance
of what is just or what is beautiful, but nobody settles for the appearance of
the good.  People only want what is truly good (504d-506a).

At this point, both Adeimantus and Glaucon press Socrates to tell them what he
thinks the good is.  Of course, Socrates insists that he doesn't know and,
thus, he cannot tell them.  After they press Socrates some more, he agrees to
tell them about "something which is a child of the good, and very similar to
it" (507c).  They agree to this (for now, though they still demand a fuller
answer at another time).

Socrates begins his account of the child of the good by reminding us about
forms.  There are the many and there is the one.  We perceive the many with
our senses, but we perceive the one with thought.  Of all our senses, sight is
the most powerful.  However, sight (unlike all the other senses) requires
a third element (in addition to the organ of sense and the things sensed).
Sight requires light in order to function.  Socrates claims that "In the world
of thought the good stands in just the same relation to thinking and the
things which can be thought as the sun, in the world of sight, stands to
seeing and the things which can be seen" (508c).

Glaucon does not fully understand, and Socrates continues.  Just as the light
of the sun makes it possible for sight to function, the form of the good makes
all truth and knowledge possible.  The form of the good is the cause of all
knowledge and truth.  We can know (and know truths about) the form of the
good.  But the form of the good is beyond, and more important than anything
else we know about.  Knowledge and truth are good-like, just as sight is
sun-like, but each of these things fails to be fully the thing that it is
like (508d-509a).  Glaucon assumes that the good cannot be pleasure, and
Socrates strongly agrees.  Socrates adds that just as the sun gives life and
strength to everything that is seen, the good gives life and strength to
everything that is known (509b).

Next, Socrates offers the analogy of the line.  If we divide what is seen and
what is known along a line and then subdivide what is seen and what is known,
we get the following division.  First, we have shadows and reflections in the
portion of what is seen.  Then we have natural or human-made objects when they
are seen.  Next we find thought considering real (but changeable) things as
images of the forms.  Finally, we encounter thought moving from first
principles and considering the forms as forms.  (Glaucon does not understand
this last step.  And no wonder.) (509d-510b).  Socrates names the four stages
that the line depicts as follows: conjecture, belief, thinking, and
understanding.  (I've given them in the order worst to best; Socrates goes in
the order of best to worst.) (511c-511e).
