# *Republic* Book 7

(**NB**: Book 7 continues from Book 6 with no transition at all.)  Socrates
offers another analogy: the allegory of the cave.  Glaucon finds the analogy
"strange," but Socrates replies, "No more strange than us" (515a).  What is
the point of this bizarre analogy?  The prisoners in the cave (i.e., us) have
no knowledge, but they think that they do.  We too only see shadows and
half-truths, but we think that we know a great deal (514a-517a).

Socrates claims that this analogy shows us why people who are closer to real
philosophy scorn "everyday affairs" (517c-d).  They want to spend their time
pursuing knowledge and the form of the good.  Everything else seems less
interesting and less valuable.  However, some philosophers must return to
everyday affairs in order to govern the city.  That is the only way for the
city to be as successful as possible.  Furthermore, there is nothing unjust
here: the city educated and raised these philosophers, so they owe the city
everything.  Finally, Socrates concludes that a city where the rules do not
want to rule will be "the best and most stable government, whereas the city
with rulers of the opposite kind will have a government of the opposite kind"
(519c-520d).

After a quick reminder that we should only allow rulers who don't want to rule
and that only philosophers will not want to rule (520d-521c), Socrates and
Glaucon consider how we can create philosophers.  Socrates proposes that
arithmetic is the type of study that can turn people towards philosophical and
abstract truths.  Socrates says that they need a type of study that draws one
away from mere perception and towards being and abstraction.  In particular,
he says that some areas of study involve things that seem (at the same time)
to possess opposed qualities and that these types of study are needed to
create philosophers.  Socrates then argues that arithmetic is such a study,
because (e.g.) objects appear to be one and many at the same time (e.g., one
army but many soldiers?).  Next, Socrates says that the guardians-to-be should
study geometry.  After this, they should study two-dimensional objects and the
qualities of depth.  (I didn't fully understand what Socrates has in mind
here.)  Next, they should study astronomy and then harmonics.  In each case,
however, Socrates wants the guardians to study these subjects as goads to the
forms, not for their practical effects.  The next (and final?) subject of
study is dialectic (521c-534e).

During a discussion of when—at what age—to introduce different subjects,
Socrates makes a detour to criticize the practice of dialectic among
(relatively) young people.  According to Socrates, we should not let
adolescents get a taste of argument and dialectic because they are not yet
ready for these things.  They treat them like a game or a competition, and
they imitate people without understanding what they are imitating.  They tear
arguments (and values!) to pieces without an appropriate concern for truth to
guide them.  As a result, they fall into a kind of nihilism.  They destroy the
moral values they know, but they leave nothing to replace these values with
(537e-539d).
