# On Hating and Despising Philosophy

Bernard Williams

As long as there has been such a subject as philosophy, there have been
people who hated and despised it.

I do not want to exaggerate, in a self-pitying or self-dramatising way, the
present extent of intensity of this dislike; I am not thinking of hte
philosopher as emblematically represented by the figure of Socrates, the
martyr to free thought who reaches what the pious or conventional regard as
the wrong answer. Nor do I suppose that philosophers are often seen as
politicians are in Australia, where that profession (I was once told) is
regarded as much like that of nightsoil workers. Still less are they like
American lawyers, notoriously considered powerful, ubiquitous and horrible.

Few people, after all, think about philosopher smuch, and some of those who
do may well regard them with a mildly bemused respect. But the subject does
collect a familiar style of complaint: that philosophy gets no answers, or
no answers to any question that any grown-up person would worry about, or
no answer which would be worth worrying about, even if the question were.
The complaint is, basically, that philosophy is useless: either
intrinsically useless, or useless in the form in which it is usually done,
a professional or academic form. It is this second view, that philosophy is
useless but ought not to be, that is likely to add dislike to mere
contempt.

In asking many of their questions -- what doing an action is, for instance,
or how by making noises we can make sense to each other, if indeed we can
-- philosophers are motivated by curiosity. But that is not their only
motive, and particularly in asking political and ethical questions, about
justice, the rightful use of power, and what sorts of life might be worth
living, they have wanted to be helpful. They have even hoped, some of them,
to redeem or transform humanity.

Of course, not every such question is philosophical. Politics itself, and
religion, and people in the bar discuss these things, and they are not all
doing philosophy. Philosophy comes into it when the discussion becomes more
reflective or theoretical or systematic, and it is typical of philosophy
that its discussions of ethics and politics have some connection with those
other more theoretical questions, about knowledge, action and psychology.
Arguments for political toleration have often been linked to the idea that
no one has a monopoly of moral truth. The idea that all human eings share
moral freedom has been offered as a basis of liberalism. These examples are
modern, but philosophy in the past had similar interests, and equally it
was capable of attracting some rather special styles of dislike.

The most radical form of the complaint against philosophy is that it is *as
such* irredeemably useless: that all of it is empty, pointless,
word-spinning which wastes time and distracts people from worthwhile work.
This style of objection came, once upon a time, from certain religious
outlooks: Tertullian, for example, said that he agreed that Christianity
was absurd, and that was why he believed it. Other pious people have
thought that philosophical reflection was a distraction from the religious
life and an evasion from it, putting aridly clever arguments in place of an
honest view of life's commitments. That complaint was directed as much to
religious philosophy as to any other: in fact, theology was seen as in some
ways the worst kind of philosophy, being a parody of religious as it should
really be.

These days, most of those who take this kind of attitude to philosophy are
not religious, but scientists, or -- more typically -- fellow-travellers of
science, and they take it not in the name of religioun but in the interest
of an anti-philosophical and confidently puritanical view of science. Just
as the religious haters of philosophy most hated religious philosophy, so
these complainers may particularly dislike the philosophy that is nearest
to science, such as that which considers the relations between thinking and
the brain. The scientific critics are disposed to see this as a lazy
substitute for work in the lab.

These complainers have a problem, which is similar to one that their
religious forbears had: they cannot hope to justify their story that
science is useful and philosophy is useless simply by doing science -- in
order to justify it, they will have to do philosophy. Their best strategy,
then, is not to try to justify their complaint, or even to mention it, but
to ignore philosophy and, if they are scientists, get on with science.

A different view is that philosophy does not have to be useless, but that
in its present forms it mostly is. On this account, there is something that
philosophy could do, indeed used to do, but which it has now forsaken. It
could and should help us, but instead of doing so, philosophers spend their
time in academic exercises which are technical and inaccessible. This is
the sort of attitude which was expressed in a recent review by Roger
Scruton,1 who is, among other things, a philosopher, and certainly does not
think that he despises philosophy as such. He claimed that philosophy
should 'say something useful to the ordinary person', and should give him
'help in confronting the moral morass which surrounds him'. The complaint
here is that philosophy is too technical and abstract to be available and
helpful to people who lack the appropriate training. In a formal and
unappealing way, it is too *hard*, and in being too hard, it has betrayed
its promise of human helpfulness.

This, too, is an old complaint, which goes back at least to Plato's time,
and in that fact there is a considerable irony. Plato is a hero of those
who claim the human importance of philosophy, and rightly so; indeed, if he
does not speak (rightly or wrongly) to our most basic concerns, it is hard
to see which philosopher does. yet those who in Plato's time complained
that philosophy was becoming technical and inaccessible -- concered,
worthy, pompous, in some cases merely opportunistic, citizens -- had Plato
as their enemy. We are told that at the door of Plato's Academy there was
a sign that read 'Let no one enter who knows no geometry,' and the studies
that went on inside it were very hard. Plato though, with increasing
sternness as he got older, that philosophy could not help anyone unless it
was true to itself. Its truthfulness meant, too, that it could not tell in
advance what would help; and since that was so, it could not hope to find
things that would help if it thought that it knew in advance what kinds of
things they would be.
