# *Knowledge* Jennifer Nagel (OUP, Oxford, 2014)

## Chapter 1: Introduction

### Searching for knowledge

Nagel argues for a difference between *information* and *knowledge*. We should
not confuse a flood of information for a flood of knowledge. We may have more
information at our fingertips than any time in previous history, but that
doesn’t mean that we have more knowledge.

Nagel introduces an essential contrast here: knowing that *p* is not the same as
thinking that *p*. To know is somehow stronger than the other case. Nagel calls
the less desireable case “mere opinion,” “illusion,” and “something less than
the real thing”—where “the real thing” is knowledge.

### Knowledge and the knower

Nagel argues that knowledge requires a knower. Although we talk about knowledge
“stored in databases and libraries,” (2) this is potentially deceptive. She
contrasts knowledge with resources such as water or gold. Water or gold “would
continue to exist even if sentient life were wiped out in a catastrophe” (2),
but knowledge would not.

Furthermore, Nagel says that we should not “identify knowledge with facts” (2).
Knowledge requires a knower in a way that a fact does not. Something can be
a fact without being known. That said, knowledge is some form of relation
between a knower and a fact: facts are what the knower knows, namely something
that is the case.

Knowledge can belong to individuals or groups. Nagel makes the interesting point
that group knowledge can be more than the sum of its parts. She uses orchestras
and weapons systems as examples, but we can also think about a school. Nagel
acknowledges that there might be knowers other than individual humans and groups
of humans, but she says her focus will be on individual human knowers.

### Spotting the difference

Some people might doubt that there is a difference between knowing and believing
something. Instead, these people might argue for what Nagel calls “the Cynical
Theory” that knowledge is just belief plus power (5). On such a view, someone
counts as knowing that *p* if (i) they believe *p* and (ii) they have power, status,
or authority. That’s it. Their mental state is no more than belief.

What can we say for such a theory? Here are a few things.
1. Power, in the form of status or authority does seem likely to make other
   people *say* someone has knowledge.
2. Knowledge does seem likely to help people gain power. (Though this is also
   a problem for the Cynical Theory since how does a person without power have
   or gain knowledge to begin with?) But even if these two points are true, the
   Cynical Theory has to say something more. It must add the following:
3. (1) and (2) are all there is to knowledge. There’s nothing else to it.  This
   third claim seems very hard to swallow. (NB: there are *many* such cynical or
   undermining theories. I would almost argue that they are very much the flavor
   of the times.)

Nagel offers two main thoughts against the Cynical Theory. First, it doesn’t
seem to account for how we use the concept of knowledge. We doubt that powerful
people know, and we often attribute knowledge to people without power. Second,
know is one of a very small group of words that appears to be universal across
human languages. The second point, by itself, doesn’t work against the Cynical
Theory, but it reinforces the first point. If a word, with a meaning that goes
against the Cynical Theory, appears in all human languages, that suggests that
the concept is not what the Cynical Theory claims it is.

### Knowing vs thinking

In order to distinguish these two ideas, Nagel starts with truth. If Jill knows
that her door is locked while Bill thinks that his door is locked, then we can
be sure that Jill’s door is locked but not Bill’s door. The verb ‘know’ is
factive (or a success verb). Other such verbs are “see,” “remember,” and
“prove.”

On a side-note, Nagel mentions the idea of “a special essence” of things. She
has in mind things like diamonds that have “a special structure of carbon
atoms.”  If science studies the essence of physical things, I sometimes want to
say that philosophy studies the essence, the real nature, of concepts. Knowledge
is an example of such an idea, and epistemology is an attempt to give the
essence of the concept of knowledge. One feature of the essence of knowledge is
its implication of truth: what someone knows is true.

Knowledge requires more than truth. Nagel adds confidence and justification,
though she doesn’t use the word “justification” here. She alludes to the idea of
a three-part analysis of knowledge: (i) knowledge requires truth, (ii) knowledge
requires justification, and (iii) knowledge requires some third element. But
Nagel does not yet discuss what this third thing might be.

Finally, Nagel says that she will rely on an objective and shared concept of
truth. She explicitly argues against relativistic definitions of truth, and she
gives Protagoras as an example of such an account.

## Chapter 2: Scepticism

### Can you be sure?

You might be wrong about anything you believe. Many beliefs seem simple,
trivial, and obvious: I am awake, I am wearing shoes (or not), I am sitting in
a chair (or not), and so on. But I may be dreaming. Once this thought takes
hold, we may doubt our everyday beliefs, and in this case we may go on to worry
that *everything* we believe is wrong—or may be wrong. Scepticism takes root
when we move from “this or that belief may be wrong” to “I may not know anything
at all.”

### The historical roots of scepticism

Nagel views the Academics as arguing that knowledge is impossible while
Pyrrhonian skeptics “aim to reach no conclusions at all” (13). She lays out
a version of the Academic arguments against the Stoics. Then she motivates the
deeper skepticism of the Pyrrhonians by inviting us to “wonder about the
internal consistency” of the Academic position: “how could the Academics be so
certain of the impossibility of knowledge while at the same time doubting our
ability to establish anything with certainty?” (15).

I have several problems with this as history. First, a more charitable view of
the Academics sees them as arguing *ad hominem* in a Socratic manner. Second,
Aenesidemus and Antiochus rejected the development of Academic skepticism for
very different reasons—and neither of them for quite the reasons that Nagel
suggests here.

I don’t have much to say about Nagel’s picture of Śrīharśa or Descartes. Both
are fine, but too brief for me to do much with.

G.E. Moore takes a radically different approach. Roughly: he shifts the burden
of proof. Nothing the skeptic says is more persuasive than my belief that I have
two hands. We reject the skeptic by arguing that the skeptical scenario is
possible, but we have no real reason to believe it.

Russell argues, via inference to the best explanation, that the skeptical
scenarios are possible, but far less simple or likely than our ordinary views.
